




        a brief History
        Prehistoric man in Asia Minor (now modern Turkey) or Greece
        could look out across the Aegean toward the horizon and see the faint
        silhouette of land. Their curiosity pushed them to build vessels that
        were strong enough to ford the open seas and reach these islands,
        marking the start of the long legacy of Mediterranean seafaring.
        Around 7000 b.c. , the Phoenicians set out from what is now
        Iran to explore their surroundings. They eventually reached the
        islands, and founded colonies on the islands in the northernmost part
        of the Aegean Sea. An important early material, obsidian, was
        discovered on the island of Milos. Obsidian is a hard, vitreous
        volcanic rock, which could be fashioned into tools for cutting and
        stabbing. The high quality of the seam on Milos ensured that the area
        remained popular with early travelers.
        The basic elements of life in the Aegean began to come
        together as early as 5000 b.c. , and were already in place by the late
        Bronze Age (c. 2700 b.c. ). The major changes were not to daily tasks
        and routines, but to the political power base, which changed regularly
        and not necessarily peacefully throughout the ages.
        Cycladic Culture
        At around 3500 b.c. , a sophisticated culture evolved in the
        Cyclades islands. The distinctive, sculpted marble figures of the era
        are now being reproduced in vast quantities as souvenirs. You will find
        original examples in the archaeological museums throughout the
        Cyclades, although one of the earliest examples is in the museum on
        Paros. The people farmed and fished; on the dawning of the Bronze Age
        in 2700 b.c. , they began to work with metals. The Cycladic culture was
        influenced by societies in the east, importing the pottery wheel from
        Mesopotamia. They also continued to trade in obsidian and the local
        marble.
        The Minoans and the Myceneans
        Farther south in Crete, the Minoan culture developed after
        2000 b.c. into the most significant of its age, spreading its influence
        throughout the region by trade and diplomacy. Santorini (Thira), the
        next major island north, was heavily influenced by Crete, and the
        settlements of Thira and Akrotiri thrived at this time. The magnificent
        frescoes and mosaics found at Akrotiri are in Athens at present, but
        the remains of the buildings at the site provide ample evidence of the
        sophistication of the culture here.
        Around 1500 b.c. , a massive volcanic eruption at Santorini
        destroyed not only Akrotiri — under feet of ash and pumice — but the
        whole Minoan civilization. Massive tidal waves swept over Crete, and
        other parts of the Mediterranean, smashing buildings and drowning many
        thousands of people.
        In the wake of this tremendous natural upheaval, the Aegean
        Islands next came under the influence of the Mycenaeans (at around 1300
        b.c. ), who had a base in the Peloponnese region of the Greek mainland.
        The Mycenaeans were an acquisitive race who came to conquer, not to
        trade. Their extensive military campaigns were later chronicled by
        Homer in his epic poems The Odyssey and The Iliad.
        The Rise of Athens
        The Dorians, who came overland from northern Europe,
        conquered the Mycenaeans. They were a barbaric race, and their custody
        of the area brought about a dark period during which the written word
        was forgotten and art disappeared. They held sway over islands off the
        northern Greek coast, but the Phoenicians kept control of the main sea
        routes; south of the area, trade continued as usual. At the same time,
        city-states began to grow in influence on the southern Greek mainland.
        Athens became the most powerful, heralding the start of the classical
        Greek period. However, Greece was not yet a country; each city-state
        was self-governing and autonomous.
        The new culture spread throughout the Mediterranean, helped
        by a huge increase in migration from the mainland to new settlements
        such as Carthage, a Greek city on the African coast of the
        Mediterranean. Culture and the arts flourished once again. Athletic
        prowess was admired and the Olympic games were constituted in 776 b.c.
        , to promote friendly competition. Homer wrote his epic works on Chios;
        and lyrical poetry was much admired, particularly the work of the poets
        Archilochos on Paros and Sappho on Lesvos.
        The preeminent islands of this era were Delos, a sacred
        island and center of religion ruled by Athens; Samos, ruled by the
        tyrant Polycrates; and Naxos, whose ruler Lygdamis undertook some major
        building projects. Archaeology shows that, during this time, societies
        lived mainly in coastal trading towns with little settlement
        inland.
        The Persian Wars
        As Athens rose in influence and power in the West, it was
        matched in the East by the rise of the Persian Empire. From a power
        base in Anatolia, the Persians overran the eastern Aegean Islands and
        set their sights on the Cyclades. In 490 b.c. , they captured sacred
        Delos and razed the settlements on Naxos. The island communities were
        undecided about which side to back for a time. Paros and Andros
        contributed to the Persian armory, while others supported Athens. The
        two superpowers finally clashed at the epic battles of Marathon and
        Salamis in 480 b.c. The Persians were defeated, and Athens duly
        punished the islands that had turned against it.
        Following its victory, Athens introduced the concept of a
        mutual protection alliance (a kind of NATO of the ancient world).
        Several islands and Greek city-states agreed to work together, and
        created a treasury to fund their plans, which was held on the island of
        Delos. The alliance became known as the Delian League. Although there
        were minor internal wrangles, the league controlled the Aegean and the
        greater Athenian Empire for most of the fifth century b.c. Later, in
        454 b.c. , the treasury was transferred to Athens and its deposits were
        used to finance the construction of many of the major buildings and
        temples of the Classical Age.
        In 431 b.c. , Athens began a war with its neighbor and
        league member Sparta. Although the islands saw little action, as the
        war went on they could see that Athens was slowly losing its power.
        Before the end of the war in 401 b.c. , many islands had already
        transferred their allegiance to the victors, who were led by Philip II
        of Macedon. He was followed in 336 b.c. by his son Alexander the Great,
        one of the most remarkable leaders in history. His rise to power
        ushered in the Hellenistic period.
        Hellenistic and Roman Periods
        When Alexander went on to conquer lands as far to the east
        as India, the Aegean became a crossroads for the long trading routes.
        Delos became one of the largest marketplaces in the empire. Following
        Alexander’s death, his lands were divided among his generals. Much of
        the Aegean came under the rule of the Ptolemies, along with Egypt.
        Cleopatra was a member of this famous ruling clan.
        Although in 88 b.c. , Mithradates made a swift and
        successful raid from the East across Asia Minor and the Aegean Islands,
        the next major power change brought influence from the West. The Greek
        Hellenistic Empire was gradually, and peacefully, absorbed into the
        Roman Empire.
        The Byzantine Empire and the Coming of Christianity
        The Romans ruled a pagan empire, but the Aegean had an
        important influence on the early development of Christianity. In a.d.  
        95, St. John arrived on Patmos, a small rocky island in the Dodecanese,
        as a political prisoner. It was here that he wrote what was to become
        the final book of the New Testament, the Book of Revelation. It wasn’t
        until a.d. 330, however, when the newly converted Emperor Constantine
        made Byzantium, renamed Constantinople, capital of his Eastern Empire
        that Christianity was assured of its dominant role in future Greek
        life.
        The Byzantine Empire had powerful and well-fortified
        cities, but the countryside and the outlying islands were ravaged by
        waves of invaders. In an attempt to counter a threat from the Saracen
        Muslims, a new potent religious force from the East, the Byzantine army
        forcefully enlisted the men of the islands. Disease took a further
        toll. By the time of the Crusades, many of the Aegean islands had been
        practically depopulated.
        As the Byzantine Empire weakened at the end of the first
        millennium, Crusader forces were sent from Western Europe to counter
        the Muslim forces and retake Jerusalem for the Christian faith.
        Unfortunately, their zeal was not matched by their discrimination. The
        crusaders swept through the land of Byzantium slaughtering Christians
        as well as Muslims, civilians as well as soldiers. Constantinople was
        taken by Crusader forces in 1204, and they stripped the city of many of
        its finest treasures — which now grace the public buildings of
        Venice — although a large consignment of books and manuscripts was
        transferred to the monastery at Patmos before the city fell.
        While Byzantine land was being divided, there was no one in
        control of the seas, so pirates raided towns on many of the islands. To
        counter this, the populations moved from their homes on the coast and
        built settlements inland, out of sight of the raiding parties. This
        created a pattern seen today throughout the Aegean of a small port
        (skala) which serves an inland settlement or chora, making it easier to
        protect the island from attack.
        The minor Aegean Islands were taken by various powerful
        European noblemen, many of whom were Genoese or Venetian, such as Marco
        Sanudo on Naxos. The noblemen had free rein to create their own
        fiefdoms. The Venetians fortified their main towns — Naxos Town and
        Antiparos Town are wonderful examples of this — creating labyrinths of
        narrow alleys and cul-de-sacs that were designed to confuse and to
        demoralize invaders. The Genoese took control of the eastern Aegean
        Islands, which were considered the most valuable for agriculture and
        trade.
        After a final bloody defeat by the Muslims in 1309,
        Christian forces were forced from the Holy Land. The Knights of St.
        John, a holy military force, made their way to Rhodes and Kos in the
        Dodecanese. They began the process of building their strong citadels,
        and reinforcing the Christian faith on the islands. However, they had
        not seen the last of their Muslim foe. A force was gaining strength in
        the east to threaten their new bases.
        The Coming of the Ottoman Turks
        The Ottomans were roving invaders who came from the east,
        taking land in what is now Turkey. By the end of the 13th century, they
        began their first raids on the Aegean Islands. In 1453, they took
        Constantinople, and immediately made it their capital, renaming it
        Istanbul.
        They then set their sights on the islands of the Knights of
        St. John and, after an unsuccessful siege in 1480, they finally ejected
        the knights from the Dodecanese in 1522. In 1566, they wrested Chios
        from the Genoese, bolstering their hold on the eastern Aegean Islands,
        but the Cyclades remained in Venetian hands for another generation or
        more — Tinos was the last to fall in 1715. The Ottomans brought new
        influences to the islands that they controlled, forming a large empire
        that stretched around the eastern Mediterranean.
        Toward Greek Independence
        However, a movement was growing on the Greek peninsula
        against Ottoman rule and for an independent Greek state. In 1770,
        Russia came to aid the Greeks (defined by their Orthodox religion
        rather than by historical geographical boundaries), declaring war on
        the Ottoman Empire and occupying several Aegean islands until 1774.
        Graffiti written by Russian soldiers can be seen in the caves of
        Antiparos.
        Although this attempt was unsuccessful, the campaign for a
        Greek state continued into the 19th century and began to grow in
        strength. The Aegean Islands played their part. Lesvos, Chios, and
        Samos lay in the important shipping lanes, and patriots began
        disrupting Ottoman cargo traffic. In return, the Turks violently put
        down every insurrection, including the massacre on Chios, when 22,000
        people were slaughtered.
        The Ottoman Empire was weakening, however, and in 1821, the
        peoples of the Greek mainland achieved nationhood for the first time.
        The Cyclades and the Sporades island chains were also included in this
        new state. A new sense of identity enveloped Greek peoples throughout
        the Aegean, thus commencing a movement to expand Greece and unify the
        disparate Orthodox populations.
        The Twentieth Century
        A series of disastrous decisions at the beginning of the
        20th century began to sound a death knell for the Ottoman Empire. The
        Turks lost a short war with Italy, and were forced to relinquish the
        Dodecanese islands to the Italians. Greece took this opportunity to
        absorb the islands of the northern and eastern Aegean and to add
        Macedonia to its mainland territories.
        Following this debacle, the Ottomans then allied themselves
        to Germany in the World War I, losing more territory with the defeat of
        the Germans in that war. Greece was handed a strip of land along the
        western coast of Asia Minor, which for over 2,000 years had had a
        substantial Greek population. Greece moved in to administer the land,
        but a new influence upset any grand dreams of making this region a part
        of greater Greece.
        In 1923, Turkey broke away from the tired Ottoman rulers,
        and Kemal Ataturk rose to power on a wave of popular support. He
        promised a modern state for his people, but as the situation became
        volatile, civil strife broke out in Turkish cities, and those
        considered Greek were victims of threats and violence. Many had to
        leave their birthplaces, fleeing to Lesvos, Chios, and Samos, the
        Greek-ruled islands just offshore. Thousands of people arrived with
        little more than the clothes they wore, putting great strain on the
        resources of the islands. Finally, Greece was ousted from its new
        territory in Asia Minor, which became part of the new Turkish
        state.
        Greece attempted to stay out of World War II, but Mussolini
        saw Greece as an ideal addition to his Italian empire. His forces made
        a series of attacks from their bases in the Dodecanese islands,
        including sinking a Greek naval vessel in the harbor of Tinos Town, but
        they only succeeded in strengthening the resolve of the population
        against them. Later the Germans came in force and occupied many of the
        islands.
        After the war, in 1949, the Dodecanese islands finally
        became part of the Greek nation. But the country was politically
        fragmented, with arguments between monarchists and republicans, right
        and left, and tension escalated into civil war. The struggle bypassed
        most of the islands, although there was fierce fighting on Samos. Even
        after the fighting stopped more than a decade later, the country was
        not stable.
        At the same time, the massive growth in air and road
        transport saw shipping decline in importance. The Aegean Islands, which
        for centuries had been important ports on the trading routes, became
        the backwaters of this new transport network and the economies of
        several islands came close to collapse.
        In 1967, the military took the reins of power in Athens,
        and until 1974, the “Colonels” held sway with a repressive and brutal
        regime. Many Greek islanders chose to leave rather than live in poverty
        and terror, and many made new homes in the United States and Australia.
        The expansion of air travel began the age of mass tourism, and Greece
        along with the Aegean Islands became exciting destinations for northern
        Europeans escaping their damp, cool summers.
        In 1982, Greece joined the European Common Market (now the
        European Union). Since this time, membership has been of great monetary
        benefit to the country. The EU has given large subsidies to develop
        Greece’s infrastructure and grants to excavate and protect its ancient
        monuments.
        Airfields have been constructed on a number of the islands,
        and road systems have been expanded and im proved. Private investment
        has even made an increasingly modern ferry fleet possible.
        Politically, the 1990s have been relatively quite times for
        the islands, although the divorce of Greek prime minister Andreas
        Papandreou and his subsequent marriage to a much younger woman caused
        consternation within conservative Greek society.
        As the Balkans flared to war once again, Greek nationalism
        has stirred, and there have been discussions in the kafeneion about the
        land of Macedonia returning to the fold of its forefathers. Whether
        this will ever happen remains to be seen, but perhaps the aid offered
        by Greece to Turkey after 1999’s devastating earthquake is a sign that
        the animosity between these two traditional enemies is beginning to
        diminish.








        A Brief History
        Jerusalem’s recorded history begins with its mention in
        Egyptian court records 4,000 years ago, but there had been human
        settlements here for centuries, probably millennia, before that. At the
        beginning of the second millennium b.c. , Jerusalem was a Canaanite
        mountain stronghold on a secondary trade route, far less important than
        biblical cities such as Hazor, Megiddo, Beth Shean, and Shechem. The
        earliest name associated with the city, Ur usalim, perhaps meant “city
        of Shalim” or “founded by Shalim. ” Scholars speculate that Shalim
        might have been an ancient Semitic deity of peace, for the name
        resembles the modern Hebrew and Arabic words for “peace”: shalom and
        salaam, respectively. If true, this is an ironic name for a city that
        would become one of the most constantly and bitterly embattled places
        on the face of the earth.
        Biblical Jerusalem
        In the Bible, Genesis 14:18–20 records that Abraham visited
        the city of “Salem” in approximately 1800 b.c. and was blessed by the
        city’s ruler, Melchzedik, who offered him bread and wine. The city is
        not mentioned again in the Bible until the time of the great poet
        warrior, King David, who captured the city from the Jebusites in about
        1000 b.c. The Bible describes how David’s soldiers conquered Jerusalem
        by discovering a water tunnel under the walls and using it to take the
        city by surprise. Warren’s Shaft, part of a Canaanite water system
        discovered by 19th-century archaeologists and open to visitors, might
        be the very tunnel infiltrated by David’s army.
        Perhaps because Jerusalem was in neutral territory not
        allotted to any of the twelve rival tribes of Israel, David made it the
        capital of his newly formed kingdom and brought the most talented
        artisans, dedicated priests, magical poets and musicians, and the most
        formidable soldiers from each of the tribes to live in his city. He
        also brought the Ark of the Covenant, the portable tabernacle
        containing the Tablets of the Law received on Mount Sinai, to the
        Spring of Gihon, just outside the walls of Jerusalem. There the Ark
        rested until it was placed in the Temple, built in approximately 960
        b.c. on Mt. Moriah, the high point at the northern end of the city.
        The Temple (today known as the “First” Temple) was completed
        by David’s son and successor, King Solomon. According to biblical
        tradition, although David bought the land for the Temple and carefully
        assembled its building materials, he was deemed unworthy of
        constructing the Temple because he was a man of war with blood on his
        hands. At the Temple’s dedication, Solomon addressed his God: “... the
        Heavens, even the Heaven of the Heavens, cannot contain Thee; how much
        less this House that I have built? ”
        The site of the Temple eventually became identified as Mt.
        Moriah, on which it stood, where Abraham was called to sacrifice his
        son Isaac. Along with this splendid house of worship, Solomon built a
        royal palace, mansions for his wives, temples for the foreign gods
        worshipped by the princesses he had married, and towers for the defense
        of the capital. Under the wise reign of Solomon, the city flourished as
        the capital of an empire that stretched from Damascus to the Red Sea
        and controlled the trade routes from Egypt to Phoenicia. The Temple and
        royal palace were adorned with gold and ivory from Africa and with
        cedar from Lebanon; the beauties and glories of Jerusalem under Solomon
        have captivated readers of the Bible for almost 3,000 years. But with
        his death the empire collapsed, and the Israelite kingdom was divided
        into two separate, impoverished, often warring nations: Israel, with
        its capital at Shechem in the north, ruled by a series of northern
        dynasties; and the smaller kingdom of Judah, with its capital at
        Jerusalem, from which the Davidic dynasty continued to rule. The Bible
        tells us that the cruelty and impiety of the rulers of both kingdoms
        aroused the fury of the great Prophets.
        In 701 b.c. the Assyrian armies of Sennacherib destroyed
        Israel and moved southward to besiege Jerusalem. Thanks to King
        Hezekiah’s hidden water tunnel, the city narrowly escaped destruction.
        The end of David’s dynasty came in 587 b.c. , when Nebuchadnezzar, King
        of Babylon, invaded Judah to lay siege to Jerusalem. When it fell, the
        Temple and all the buildings were burned. The people of the
        once-glorious city were forced into an exile known as “the Babylonian
        Captivity. ”
        In time, the kingdom of Babylon was overthrown and the
        Israelites were permitted to return to Jerusalem in 539 b.c. The city
        was now under the more tolerant rule of the Persians, but rebuilding
        was slow work. The Second Temple was finished in 515 b.c. , but much of
        the city still lay in ruins.
        Jerusalem submitted peaceably to the rule of the Greeks in
        332 b.c. under Alexander the Great and, subsequently, to his
        Hellenistic successors as well as the Egyptian Ptolomeys and the Syrian
        Seleucids. When Seleucid rulers outlawed Judaism, Jews led by Judah
        Maccabee and his brothers staged a revolution in 167 b.c. and, against
        all odds, restored the primacy of Jewish religious life in Jerusalem.
        The Macabbees cleansed the Temple of Hellenistic idols and the blood of
        pagan sacrifices; the eight-day celebration of Hanukkah (Feast of
        Dedication) commemorates their victory. The Hasmonean dynasty,
        descendants of the Maccabee family, ruled an independent Jewish
        Commonwealth that stretched from the Negev to the Galilee. Jerusalem
        grew, surrounded with a formidable wall and defended by towers beside
        the Jaffa Gate. The Hasmoneans ruled until Pompey’s Roman legions
        arrived in 63 b.c.
        Roman Jerusalem
        After the initial years of Roman administration and
        political infighting, Rome installed Herod (scion of a family from
        Idumea, a Jewish kingdom in the desert) as King of Judea. He reigned
        from 37 to 4 b.c. , during which time he fortified the Hasmonean wall
        and rebuilt the defense towers beside Jaffa Gate, the foundation of
        which still stand. Several palaces were built and a water system
        installed. Herod also completely rebuilt the Temple, making it one of
        the most important religious centers in the Roman Empire. The courtyard
        around the Temple was expanded to accommodate hundreds of thousands of
        pilgrims, and the Temple Mount was shored up by retaining walls made
        with great stone blocks. One of these walls, the Western Wall, is today
        a major reminder of Jerusalem’s greatness under Herod. A massive
        fortress was built overlooking the Temple Mount, which Herod named
        “Antonia” in honor of his Roman friend and benefactor, Mark Antony.
        For all his accomplishments, Herod was nevertheless hated
        by his subjects; he taxed, he tortured, and he ordered the massacre of
        male Jewish infants in an attempt to do away with the heralded Messiah.
        When Jesus was born in about 4 b.c. , Joseph and Mary escaped Herod’s
        paranoia by fleeing into Egypt with the new-born infant. They returned
        to live in the Galilee village of Nazareth, making pilgrimages to
        Jerusalem.
        According to biblical accounts, Jesus spent his life
        ministering in the Galilee Valley. In about a.d. 30 he and his
        followers went for Passover to Jerusalem, which was in unrest at this
        time, dissatisfied with Roman domination. Jesus’s entry into the Temple
        caused a commotion; after the Passover dinner he was arrested by the
        temple priests, who were under direct Roman rule. Jesus was put on
        trial quickly and condemned to crucifixion, a Roman form of execution
        for political and religious dissidents as well as for common criminals.
        In a province rife with rebellion and retaliation, the execution in
        Jerusalem of yet another religious leader from the Galilee did not by
        itself have an immediate effect on history.
        After Jesus’s crucifixion, harsh Roman rule continued until
        a.d. 66, when the Jews rebelled. For four years Jewish zealots fought
        against the might of Rome. At the end, the Roman general Titus laid
        siege to Jerusalem in a.d. 70, finally attacking its starved and
        weakened defenders. Those who didn’t escape were executed or sold into
        slavery. The Holy City and the Temple were destroyed. The last of the
        zealots held out for another three years at Masada (see page 76). Half
        a million civilians died in the Galilee and Judea as a result of this
        first revolt against Rome, a number unequaled in ancient warfare.
        Christian and Islamic Jerusalem
        For 60 years Jerusalem lay in ruins, until the Roman
        Emperor Hadrian ordered the city rebuilt as a Roman town dedicated to
        Jupiter. In outrage, the Jews began a second revolt against Rome, led
        by Simon bar Kochba. The ruins of Jerusalem were briefly liberated,
        but, in the end, Jewish resistance to Rome was defeated with great loss
        of life. The planned new Roman city, Aelia Capitolina, was built over
        the ruins of Herodian Jerusalem, and Jews were barred from residing
        there for all time. Jerusalem’s physical existence as a spiritual city
        seemed finished, but its spiritual power for Jews, and for the
        struggling new Christian religion, remained. For the next two centuries
        Aelia Capitolina enjoyed an innocuous history.
        But the Roman Empire became Christian in the fourth
        century, and Jerusalem became a center of religion once again. Queen
        Helena, a devout Christian and the mother of Emperor Constantine the
        Great, made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in 326 to identify the sites
        associated with Jesus’s life. She found that the city’s most beautiful
        Roman temple, dedicated to the goddess Aphrodite, stood on the site of
        the crucifixion. The temple was demolished and a vast, Classical-style
        church was built around Golgotha (the hill where Jesus’s crucifixion
        was believed to have taken place). Throughout Jerusalem, other spots
        important to Jesus’s life were commemorated with religious structures.
        Pilgrims came from all over the Roman (and, later, Byzantine) Empire
        during the following centuries, but the prosperity they brought lasted
        only until 614, when Persian armies overtook Judea and reduced
        Jerusalem to rubble again. In 629, Jerusalem was recaptured by the
        Byzantines.
        Still reeling from the effects of the Persian devastation,
        Jerusalem was conquered in 638 by the forces of Islam. The Temple Mount
        was identified in Islamic tradition as “the farthest spot” (in Arabic,
        el-aksa), the site to which the Prophet Muhammad was transported in one
        night from Mecca on a winged horse, as described in the 17th chapter of
        the Koran. From here the Prophet ascended to the heavens and was
        permitted to glimpse paradise. The rock on the Temple Mount from which
        he ascended, at or close to the site of the ruined Temple, was
        commemorated by the construction of the Dome of the Rock in 691. The
        Dome of the Rock remains Jerusalem’s most striking monument; it is
        counted among the most beautiful buildings ever created. By about 715,
        the El-Aksa Mosque, third holiest place of prayer in Islam (after Mecca
        and Medina), had been built on the southern side of the Temple Mount.
        Jerusalem continued under Islamic rule for the next four and a half
        centuries. In 1099, under their leaders Godfrey de Bouillon and
        Tancred, the Crusaders captured the Holy City for Christendom by
        slaughtering both Muslims and Jews.
        Crusaders, Mamelukes, and Turks
        The Crusaders established a feudal Christian state with
        Godfrey at its head. They built many impressive churches during the
        term of the first Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, but in 1187 they were
        driven out by Muslim forces under the great warrior Saladin. During the
        Sixth Crusade (1228– 1229), the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II managed
        to secure Jerusalem for the Christians by negotiation.
        The Christians, however, could not hold the city. After
        they lost Jerusalem, a Mongol invasion swept through, and in 1244 the
        Mameluke dynasty of Egypt took control, ruling Jerusalem for the next
        250 years. The city struggled to rebuild from Crusader wars and
        invasions. Much of the best Islamic architecture in the city was
        constructed in the Mameluke era, but the past thousand years had taken
        their toll: Jerusalem was unable to regain the prosperity it had
        enjoyed in earlier times.
        In the early 16th century, the Ottoman Turkish Empire was
        advancing through the Middle East. Jerusalem fell to the Ottomans in
        1517, remaining under their control for 400 years. Suleiman the
        Magnificent rebuilt the walls and gates in the form they retain to this
        day. Fountains, inns, religious schools, and barracks were constructed.
        But when Suleiman died, his empire, including Jerusalem, began a long
        period of decline. The Holy City remained a backwater until the 19th
        century, when renewed interest among Christian pilgrims made it the
        destination of thousands of travelers each year.
        19th-Century Aspirations
        At the same time, many Jews sought religious freedom and
        fulfillment by moving to Palestine (as the Holy Land was traditionally
        called) and especially to Jerusalem. In the 1890s, Theodor Herzl
        (1860–1904) worked to organize a movement, Zionism, to create a Jewish
        state. Chaim Weizmann (1874–1952), a scientist born in Russia but later
        a British subject, did much to put Herzl’s hopes into practice.
        Weizmann was an important figure in the negotiations with the British
        government that led to the Balfour Declaration of 1917, supporting the
        idea of a Jewish “national home” in Palestine that also respected the
        rights of existing non-Jewish people already living there. The problem
        was that British strategists, who were fighting the Ottoman Turks in
        1917, had secretly promised the lands to their World War I Arab
        allies.
        In 1922 the League of Nations granted the British a mandate
        to administer Palestine. Jerusalem flourished during the early years of
        the Mandate. Modern neighborhoods, hospitals, schools, and the Hebrew
        University were built in West Jerusalem, the new Jewish enclave. But
        Arab opposition to new Jewish immigration and construction in Palestine
        led to increasing strife; by 1946, Jerusalem was an armed camp. In 1947
        the United Nations voted for the partition of Palestine into two
        states, one Jewish and one Arab, with Jerusalem as an international
        city that belonged to neither. But lacking the means to enforce its
        decision, the United Nations was powerless to halt the fighting that
        erupted as the British withdrew their troops in 1948.
        Modern Israel
        The State of Israel was declared during this difficult
        time. In response, member states of the Arab League sent troops to help
        the Palestinian Arabs. West Jerusalem, separated from the rest of the
        new Jewish nation, held out under siege for several months until
        Israeli forces secured a land corridor connecting the city to the
        coastal areas. Jews were evacuated from the Old City’s Jewish Quarter,
        and thousands of Arab families fled their homes in West Jerusalem. As a
        result of armistice agreements in 1949, Jerusalem was divided: West
        Jerusalem was to be under Israeli control, and East Jerusalem
        (including the Old City, with its Jewish, Muslim, Christian, and
        Armenian quarters) came under Jordanian authority. Free access to holy
        sites for members of all religions was guaranteed by the armistice
        agreements. However, with the city partitioned by fortifications and
        barbed wire, no Israeli or Jewish pilgrims were allowed to visit the
        Western Wall or other Jewish sites in East Jerusalem.
        For the next 19 years, Jerusalem was two cities. Political
        and religious boundaries were aggravated by occasional incidents of
        terrorism or sniping until the Six Day War in June 1967. Within three
        days the city was completely in Israeli hands, and in two weeks it was
        physically and administratively reunited. Jerusalem’s mayor, Teddy
        Kollek, spent the next 25 years orchestrating a vast program of
        development, adding new cultural institutions and parks and instituting
        neighborhood restoration projects while tirelessly me diating the
        concerns of Jerusalem’s many communities.
        Today, as always, Jerusalem is a city of controversies:
        religious Jews in conflict with secular Jews; Palestinians calling for
        independence; many residents protesting a wave of high-rise development
        that many claim will turn the Holy City into a holy megalopolis. But
        the ideas and mystique that have always made this an extraordinarily
        special place rise above the ebbing and flowing concerns of present-day
        Jerusalem as it continues to tug at the world’s attention into the new
        millennium.








        A Brief History
        Early Habitation
        The inhabited history of the Las Vegas Valley stretches to
        23,000 b.c. , when much of the area was covered by a prehistoric lake.
        During this period, the indigenous people lived in caves, hunting the
        mammals that gathered at the shoreline. The landscape of the valley
        changed dramatically over the next 200 centuries. The glaciers feeding
        the lake melted away and the lake evaporated. Fossils tell an obscure
        story of man’s slow and sporadic development.
        Around 3000 b.c. , native Archaic Indians began to develop a
        lasting hunting and gathering culture. By this time, the valley was in
        much the same geographic state as it exists in today, with one
        exception — the presence of artesian springs that bubbled to the
        surface in several areas. These springs fed a network of streams
        draining through the Las Vegas Wash to the Colorado River. The areas
        surrounding the springs were desert oases: sprawling collections of
        grasses, trees, and wildlife. Many springs lay in areas that would
        eventually become the center of the modern Las Vegas metropolis.
        For about 4000 years, the Archaics thrived in a culture that
        included many signs of early civilization. Signs of even more
        advancement appeared halfway through the first millennium a.d. , when
        the Anasazi Indians inhabited the valley. Far more progressive than the
        Archaics, the Anasazi utilized such formal agricultural techniques as
        irrigation to assist their harvest. This permitted the Anasazi to
        achieve a benchmark of advanced society — the ability to live in
        permanent shelters year-round without need to follow wildlife.
        Mysteriously, the Anasazi vanished from the valley around a.d. 1150,
        leaving it to be repopulated by the Southern Paiutes, another
        hunter-gatherer tribe.
        Unable to replicate the agricultural techniques of the
        Anasazi, the Paiutes were destined to a semi-nomadic lifestyle until
        European settlers arrived, changing the nature of existence in the
        valley forever.
        From Mailmen to Mormons
        In the early nineteenth century, America’s western
        territories were still largely unexplored. It was not until 1829 that
        Rafael Rivera, a Mexican scout, found a spring-fed valley and dubbed it
        Las Vegas — a Spanish name that leaves many modern visitors wondering
        exactly where “the meadows” really lay.
        For fifteen years, Las Vegas was used as a Spanish Trail
        way-station. In 1844, American explorer John C. Fremont parked his
        horses at Big Springs, and his report to the government resulted in a
        mail route leading past the spot on its way to California. This put Las
        Vegas on the map and was one of the crucial turning points of its
        history.
        In 1855, Mormon leader Brigham Young responded to promising
        reports of Las Vegas by sending 30 missionary settlers to the valley;
        they eventually built a fort not far from today’s Downtown. Surrounded
        by acres of farmland hewn from the hard desert, the adobe fort became a
        focal point for the development of Las Vegas for the next fifty years.
        The missionaries struggled valiantly against the dictates of the
        desert, trying simultaneously to survive the harshness of their
        circumstances and spread the Mormon faith. Additional pressures from
        arriving miners pushed the missionaries’ plight beyond recovery. Their
        supplies scarce, their harvest meager, and their spirit broken, they
        abandoned the fort in 1858.
        Despite the fact that the local land was rich in silver, by
        1865 most of the mining traffic through Las Vegas was of prospectors
        headed to California or Northern Nevada in search of gold. One
        opportunist who stayed was Octavius Decatur Gass. Bestowed with plenty
        of the invaluable pioneer spirit that characterizes Las Vegas to this
        day, Gass redirected his life by picking up where the Mormons left
        off — at least when it came to ranching and farming. Gass took over the
        abandoned Mormon fort and 640 acres (260 hectares) surrounding it,
        dubbing it the Las Vegas Ranch. He expanded the ranch and irrigated the
        land so that it would support crops and cattle. His determination had
        other results as well: Gass was named a justice of the peace and a
        territorial legislator.
        Despite his ambition, Gass’ success was short-lived. In the
        late 1870s, he defaulted on a loan from rancher Archibald Stewart, so
        Stewart took the Las Vegas Ranch for his own. True to wild-West
        stereotypes, Stewart was slain by a neighboring farmer, leaving his
        strong-willed wife, Helen, to assume the duties of the ranch. Through
        1905, Helen Stewart expanded the ranch to 2000 acres (810 hectares),
        making quite a bit of money in the process.
        What happened next would mark the end of the successful Las
        Vegas Ranch and the beginning of the era of the subdivision seen across
        almost all of Western America to this day. The railroad was coming, and
        when it arrived, Las Vegas would never be the same again.
        Of Tracks and Tracts
        At the turn of the 19th century Los Angeles and Salt Lake
        City were among the burgeoning metropolises of the new American West.
        Though the two cities remained unlinked by rail, this was about to
        change quickly. When it did, the Las Vegas Valley (which at the time
        had a non-native population of less than 30) would change as well.
        In 1903, officials of the San Pedro, Los Angeles, and Salt
        Lake Railroad arrived in Las Vegas, eager to secure a right-of-way for
        their Los Angeles–Salt Lake connection. Las Vegas would serve as a
        major stopover for crew rest and train repair. For all this, the
        railroad needed land. As mapped, the track traveled directly through
        Helen Stewart’s Las Vegas Ranch. Stewart sold 99.5 percent of her ranch
        to the railroad. The remainder she returned to the native Paiutes.
        In early 1905, the route between Los Angeles and Salt Lake
        City was completed, and train tracks bore right down the center of the
        Las Vegas Valley. On 15 May 1905, the railroad held a land sale — a
        momentous step in Las Vegas history. Standing at the depot at Main and
        Fremont streets, railroad officials auctioned 1200 lots they had
        subdivided from forty square blocks of desert scrub. Land speculators
        and locals alike were anxious to own a part of the newest railroad
        boomtown, and within an afternoon, more than 80 percent of the lots
        were sold.
        Las Vegas was no longer a small pioneer settlement. With
        rail service in place and forty blocks of private property, it was
        ready to become a real town. Businesses sprang up overnight, and wooden
        houses were erected to replace the tent city in which many of the early
        settlers had lived. One year after the auction, the population of Las
        Vegas had ballooned to 1500 residents, a portent of things to come for
        the next ninety years.
        Dam Good Luck
        From the beginning, Las Vegas was built to serve travelers.
        The railroad needed a way station, and Las Vegas was the place. Growth
        continued for ten years, and by 1915 the town had telephones,
        round-the-clock electricity, and a growing population — many of whom
        worked in the railroad repair shop. But such heady progress would soon
        come to a halt.
        The growing competition in rail transport resulted in Union
        Pacific buying the Los Angeles–Salt Lake line. Union Pacific then
        consolidated its operations, eliminating the Las Vegas repair facility.
        Additionally, Las Vegas had been made a part of Nevada’s new Clark
        County in 1909, a year when the legislature also outlawed gambling.
        These unfortunate circumstances threatened to relegate Las Vegas to the
        status of a small desert community that could no longer support its
        3000 residents. But the southwest’s growing need for water, combined
        with Las Vegas’s fortuitous proximity to the Colorado River, would give
        Las Vegas a second chance to achieve prosperity.
        Construction on Hoover Dam (originally Boulder Dam,
        subsequently renamed for the president who authorized the project)
        began in 1931 in a canyon 45 miles (72 km) southeast of Las Vegas.
        Providing an influx of $165 million to the southwestern economy, Hoover
        Dam played a major role in preventing Las Vegas from drying up, both
        financially and literally. Not only did it create jobs, but it also
        created Lake Mead, the massive reservoir that today provides water to
        all of southern Nevada.
        More Government Help
        The construction of Hoover Dam did not single-handedly save
        Las Vegas, however. The state legislature helped as well, by legalizing
        gambling in 1931 and thus solidifying the future of the town, though
        legislators and residents could never have known this at the time.
        The hordes of people who attended Hoover Dam’s 1935
        dedication set the city’s now-formidable public relations machine into
        action. They went to work on what has become one of the lengthiest
        citywide tourism campaigns ever attempted. It didn’t take long for the
        city to establish itself as a wild-West town with an “anything goes”
        attitude. Vices outlawed or heavily controlled elsewhere were legal
        here, available any hour of any day (or night). Thus originated Las
        Vegas’s reputation as an adult theme park.
        Additional catalysts for the valley’s growth came from
        World War II. Both the Las Vegas Aerial Gunnery School (which became
        Nellis Air Force Base and the Nevada Test Site) in the north, and Basic
        Magnesium in the nearby town of Henderson, arrived in the early 1940s
        as a result of America’s war effort. By 1945, the population had grown
        to almost 20,000, with workers and airmen moving in at a rapid pace.
        But this was not yet the Las Vegas of folklore.
        Mobsters and Rat Packers
        While many gambling halls opened Downtown in the 1930s and
        early 1940s, only two were built on the stretch of old Los Angeles
        Highway that ultimately became the Strip. The El Rancho Vegas (1941)
        was the first, followed by the Last Frontier (1943). During this
        period, East Coast Syndicate member Benjamin “Bugsy” Siegel earned a
        foothold as a local casino operator.
        By 1945 Siegel had become one of Las Vegas’s original
        visionaries, planning an opulent resort on the southern end of the LA
        Highway. When the Flamingo opened in December 1946, it did so with
        Hollywood flair and the new Vegas flash. But the Mafia bosses who
        financed the operation were displeased with its performance; Siegel was
        murdered in the summer of 1947.
        Despite its initial failings, Siegel’s Flamingo survived
        him, as did mob infiltration of casinos. In fact, the Flamingo would
        launch over two decades of strong mob presence in Las Vegas. Freely
        flowing “comps” (complimentary food, drink, and entertainment) were the
        order of the day, with mob bosses content to provide an environment of
        pleasurable excess as long as the cash kept rolling in.
        While the mob was running the casinos, promoters were
        busily selling Las Vegas as a glamorous Hollywood in the desert. From
        the mid-1940s to the mid-1960s, Las Vegas nurtured a growing sense that
        it was the “Entertainment Capital of the World. ” Emerging stars, no
        longer content with playing small nightclubs, came to Las Vegas with
        dreams of making it big. Many of them did. Frank Sinatra, Wayne Newton,
        and Louis Prima each arrived with mediocre status and suddenly found
        themselves with names as big as the marquees on which they were
        written. The Rat Pack — originally Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Sammy
        Davis Jr. , Peter Lawford, and Joey Bishop, all in town to film Ocean’s
        11 — landed at the Sands in January 1960 for a legendary stay. Other
        Hollywood stars came as well, simply because Las Vegas was the place to
        be.
        As a result, more casinos emerged along the Strip. The
        Thunderbird, Desert Inn, Sahara, Sands, and Riviera hotels were erected
        during this period, luring a curious clientele drawn by tales of
        all-night partying, exclusive entertainment, and cheap accommodations.
        There was no longer any question: when you wanted some unbridled adult
        fun, Las Vegas was the place to be.
        New Legitimacy
        Organized crime was soon to have a formidable adversary in
        its bid to control Las Vegas — corporate cash. Though Las Vegas had
        developed a powerful local economy, few major outside investments were
        made in the city, due primarily to mob infiltration and its inherent
        ties to illegal activities.
        That would change dramatically with the 1966 arrival of
        billionaire Howard Hughes. A legitimate businessman, Hughes was
        nonetheless eccentric and dramatic, a style suited to the Las Vegas
        ethos. True to the myth, the reclusive Hughes immediately cloistered
        himself in the Desert Inn’s penthouse. Several weeks later he was
        asked — then ordered — to vacate the room to make room for high
        rollers, whereupon he promptly bought the property and fired the
        management. Thus began Hughes’ legendary three-year, $300-million Las
        Vegas buying spree. When it was over, Hughes owned six casinos, an
        airport, and an airline, along with numerous plots of land stretching
        from the Strip to the mountains.
        Hughes’ actions would have beneficial repercussions, both
        immediate and lasting. Because of the new legitimacy Las Vegas acquired
        from Hughes’ investments, established companies such as Hilton Hotels
        bought into the gaming business, and their influence helped draw a line
        in the desert sand between legitimate operations and mob casinos, where
        illegal skimming of profits was rampant. That, combined with the
        formation of the Nevada Gaming Control Board, would signal the
        beginning of the end for heavy mob influence in the city.
        Las Vegas with a Vision
        As corporations moved in and the mob was slowly pushed out,
        a new Las Vegas emerged. The legitimization of gambling led to its
        increased legalization across the US. What was once a sure thing became
        much more competitive. Casino operators had to reassess the nature of
        their business.
        The first to really do so was Steve Wynn, a Las Vegas
        resident and owner of the Golden Nugget. In the mid-1980s, Wynn began
        plans to reinvigorate Las Vegas with a new resort. He bought several
        Strip properties — the Silver Slipper and Castaways among them — and
        demolished them to make way for a new kind of resort — Mirage —  which
        became an instant success.
        Wynn’s demolition of the existing properties started a
        trend that, more than any other, describes Las Vegas at the end of the
        20th century: removal of old properties in exchange for the potential
        of new ones. This trend has led to many more demolitions, including the
        Dunes (replaced by Bellagio), Aladdin (the new Aladdin) and Sands
        (Venetian) hotels.
        Wynn’s casinos have also set new standards. They can no
        longer be just a box filled with gaming tables, restaurants, and a
        showroom. Excalibur, the MGM Grand, the Luxor, and New York-New York
        all followed Mirage’s lead during the 1990s, offering themed
        environments and attractions for families.
        As evidence of the “ever-faster” nature of the city, by the
        middle of the 1990s the new approach showed signs of backlash, with
        many visitors criticizing the mediocrity of the Las Vegas experience.
        The latest approach is perhaps the best of the post-mob era: the
        comprehensive resort. New resorts offer attractions and amenities
        modeled after those available in top resort cities worldwide, including
        luxurious spas, signature restaurants, and exclusive boutiques.
        Additionally, a handful of resorts — such as the South-Seas
        themed Mandalay Bay, the Mirage, and the new Four Seasons — are now
        catering exclusively to the luxury travel market. The crème de la crème
        of Las Vegas deluxe is Steve Wynn’s Bellagio. The world’s most
        expensive resort at $1.6 billion, the Bellagio’s amenities include
        5-star dining, Chanel-caliber boutiques, and a world-class collection
        of artistic masterworks. Perhaps more important, such high-end
        accommodations raise the standards of expectations back to the
        mythology of the Rat Pack era.
        As it changed from mob gam bling town to corporate gaming
        venue, the population of Las Vegas skyrocketed. Over 20,000 additional
        hotel rooms have been added in a few short years, including resorts in
        Summerlin and Lake Las Vegas. Recent business projections for Las Vegas
        predict challenges; tourism revenues must increase substantially to
        sustain what is already built, while actual figures show visitation as
        steady or declining. The growth that has characterized Las Vegas for
        nearly a century may be facing a roadblock.
        Still, the future of Las Vegas is sure to be determined as
        much by the pioneering spirit that built the city as by anything else.
        With its new look and new aim, the prospects are good despite the
        warnings. Inevitably, some people will get burned in the process, but
        others will rise triumphantly from the fray to even greater successes.
        And that, more than anything, is the one constant that characterizes
        the past, present, and future of Las Vegas.








        Dublin and the Dubliners
        As capital of Europe’s most explosive economy, Dublin seems
        to be changing before your very eyes. New construction is everywhere,
        the streets buzz, traffic is increasingly congested, and in the
        frenetic pace of rush hour everyone in Dublin seems intent on changing
        places with everyone else. At night the streets are crowded with people
        bent on having a good time. Prosperity is in the air; the roar of the
        “Celtic Tiger” can clearly be heard.
        But this is not the whole picture. The proverbial
        hospitality and warm welcome are still here. This busy, modern European
        city sits on a thousand years of history — history is present
        everywhere, from elegant Merrion Square to the bullet holes on the
        General Post Office. It’s also a city of the imagination, reinvented
        and reappraised in the literature of its exiles. And the old Dublin is
        with us, too — the irreverent city of wit and charm and that peculiar
        magic possessed by Ireland and the Irish.
        Prosperity has brought with it a new emphasis on historic
        preservation. Dublin excels in packaging its past for the visitor. You
        can view artifacts from the Bronze Age, trace the history of the Easter
        Rising, or revisit Leopold Bloom’s odyssey in Ulysses. Old buildings
        are being recycled; for example, the 17th-century Royal Hospital now
        holds the Museum of Modern Art. And Dublin, a city large in
        expectations, is still small enough for the visitor to see most of its
        sights on foot.
        City on the Liffey
        The River Liffey flows from west to east through the center
        of the city to Dublin Bay. The river forms a natural line between the
        north and south sections of the city. This geography is important in
        understanding Dublin. Historically and culturally this north-south
        distinction has always been significant, and it still is today, with a
        dose of good-humored rivalry between the two areas. “ I never go north
        of the Liffey,” one man remarked.
        Farther out, both north and south, are the sweeping curves
        of the Royal and Grand Canals. The occasional cry of gulls and
        unexpected distant vistas will remind you that Dublin is by the sea,
        and the Wicklow mountains, which hold Dublin closely to the coast, are
        visible from everywhere.
        Dublin is an intimate city, physically small but tightly
        packed, a perfect place for walking. College Green, the home of Trinity
        College, provides a natural focus just south of the O’Connell Street
        bridge. O’Connell Street, the city’s grand boulevard, leads north to
        Parnell Square. To the south and east is St. Stephen’s Green and
        Georgian Dublin where the national museums are located. Along the
        Liffey to the west is Temple Bar, center of nightlife and home to many
        of Dublin’s cutting-edge artists and artistic endeavors. Up the hill
        from Temple Bar are Dublin Castle and Christ Church Cathedral.
        It won’t rain on you in Dublin all the time. The climate
        here can best be described as “changeable” and yet the sudden shifts
        from light to dark, sunshine to shower, are part of the city’s magic.
        Buildings seem to transform themselves depending on the light; Dublin
        under a lowering sky is a different place from Dublin in sunshine.
        Enjoying Dublin
        Literature has always flourished in Dublin, the only city
        to have produced three Nobel Prize winners for literature — Yeats,
        Shaw, and Beckett. Joyce, the high priest of literary Modernism,
        imagined and interpreted Dublin for the world in Ulysses (you’ll see
        references to it all over). However, sometimes it seems that the city
        produced artists of this stature by accident, even against its will.
        Beckett and Joyce, among others, had to leave their homeland to
        understand it —  and to be understood.
        Dublin theater is legendary, and no visitor should miss
        seeing a performance at the Abbey Theatre or Gate Theatre. The city’s
        impact on the rock and pop music scene with the likes of U2 and Bob
        Geldof is well known — there’s even a self-guided tour of their haunts.
        Traditional Irish music is also alive and well, especially in the pubs,
        and there has been a revival of storytelling, poetry reading, and
        traditional dancing. And in this city, where literature and theater
        have historically dominated the scene, visual arts are finally coming
        into their own with the new Museum of Modern Art and the many galleries
        that display the work of modern Irish artists.
        The constantly crowded and busy Grafton street is the most
        visible center for shopping, but there are shops all over that carry an
        international array of goods as well as the Irish crafts and souvenirs
        you expect. And while multinational chains have made inroads, they seem
        less blatant here than elsewhere. Many shops, and also hotels and guest
        houses, have been owned and managed by the same families for years, and
        theirs is the welcome of traditional Dublin hospitality.
        Dublin’s food has undergone a metamorphosis. There was a
        time when you might have apologized for it, but no longer. Dublin has
        international restaurants galore, and the New Irish Cuisine is built
        upon fresh products of Ireland’s seas, rivers, and farms. Coffee has
        replaced the ubiquitous tea — Dublin is now almost as much a coffee
        city as Vienna or Seattle.
        City and Countryside
        In a city of such human proportions it is not surprising
        that parks and gardens abound for recreation and relaxation. Phoenix
        Park in the northwest is the largest open space, but squares like St.
        Stephen’s Green are the garden oases of the city.
        On the coast, Sandymount, Dollymount, and Killiney strands
        are the places to go. The beautiful Wicklow Mountains, and the Wicklow
        Mountains National Park provide a more rugged countryside, and the area
        has breathtaking houses and gardens such as Castletown, Mount Usher,
        and Powerscourt. To the north and west are the ancient sites of
        Ireland: Malahide Castle, the evocative hill of Tara, and the long
        barrows of Knowth and Newgrange.
        The DART (Dublin Area Rapid Transit) runs north and south
        along the coast. It’s an ideal way for the visitor to reach outlying
        sights and villages. There are many guided bus tours to sights outside
        the city, and some are accessible by city bus.
        Young at Heart?
        Dublin is a young city. Almost half of Ireland’s population
        is under twenty-five, and with its universities and professional
        schools, Dublin also has a large student population. The universities
        attract students from all over the world, and this influx helps to make
        Dublin a busy, buzzing international city. However, young and old,
        stranger and Dubliner rub shoulders quite happily. Religion and respect
        for parents has not yet gone out of fashion. And young graduates are
        not leaving now — multinational corporations and European Union
        investment mean there are plenty of opportunities for them at home.
        Unemployment is at an all-time low. The Irish are actually beginning to
        come home.








        Hong Kong and
        Its People
        Exciting, mysterious, glamorous — these words have described
        Hong Kong for at least a century. With its vibrant atmosphere and
        night-and-day activity it is an intoxicating place. Hong Kong is
        crowded — it has one of the world’s greatest population densities. But
        it is also efficient, with one of the best transportation systems
        anywhere, and for such a crowded place, quiet — you don’t hear voices
        raised in anger, motorists sitting on their horns, or loud boomboxes.
        Shopping never ends — there’s always another inviting spot just down
        the street. You’ll find Hong Kong easy to get around, the people
        helpful, English spoken everywhere, and food that lives up to its
        reputation.
        On 1 July, 1997 the British Crown Colony of Hong Kong
        reverted to Chinese sovereignty as a Special Administrative Region of
        the People’s Republic of China. Today Hong Kong remains a capitalist
        enclave with its laws and rights intact, and China has promised that
        Hong Kong will continue in this fashion for at least 50 years.
        Beijing’s announced policy of maintaining Hong Kong’s prosperity and
        stability makes sense. Hong Kong has long been China’s handiest window
        on the West, and the city is unrivaled in its commercial know-how and
        managerial expertise. Around the time of the transition there was much
        speculation about how things would change. But in fact, once news of
        the handover vanished from the front pages, the people of Hong Kong
        returned to their usual topics of conversation: the economy and the
        price of housing.
        The impression of the visitor today will be that very little
        has changed. Establishments are no longer called “Royal,” Queen
        Elizabeth has vanished from the coinage, and the Union Jack has been
        replaced by the flag of China and the new Hong Kong flag with its
        bauhinia flower. But in fact, there have been changes, many of them due
        to economic progress, new construction, and other factors that
        influence cities all over the world.
        Others are more subtle. British social customs are still
        evident in the kind of polite service you get in hotels and in the long
        lines of people waiting for buses at rush hour. The British population
        has decreased; today there are as many American and Australian ex-pats
        as there are British.
        With a population of nearly eight million and a total area
        of just over 1,095 square km (423 square miles), housing is one of Hong
        Kong’s perennial nightmares. To alleviate the problem, the government
        has become the city’s major landlord with the construction of massive
        apartment blocks that, though they have every modern facility, average
        only 9 square m (100 square ft) in size. Whole cities have been created
        in the New Territories, although the unimaginative architecture of
        these towns has been criticized.
        Of Hong Kong’s population, 98 percent are Chinese. The
        majority are Cantonese, born in Hong Kong, or from South China, but
        there are immigrants from all over China. The Chinese people have been
        described as hardworking and pragmatic, attitudes that have contributed
        to Hong Kong’s success. There are many stories of refugees who arrived
        with nothing in their pockets, set up a small sidewalk stall, worked
        diligently until they had their own store, and then expanded it into a
        modest chain.
        Old customs are still followed: Fate and luck are taken very
        seriously, and astrologers and fortune-tellers do a steady business.
        Before a skyscraper can be built, a feng shui (see page 68)
        investigation must take place to ensure that the site and the building
        will promote health, harmony, and prosperity. You’ll also notice that
        gambling is a passion, whether it be cards, mah-jong, the lottery, or
        the horses. Hong Kong has two major racetracks as well as an intensive
        off-track betting system, and on weekends the ferries to Macau are
        crowded with people on their way to the casinos.
        Sightseeing in Hong Kong starts at sea level with the
        enthralling water traffic — a mix of freighters, ferries, tugs, junks,
        and yachts. Views of the city and the harbor are panoramic. From
        Victoria Peak, Hong Kong’s highest point, or from skyscrapers and
        hotels, they are especially exciting at night when the lights are
        on.
        The business and financial center and the signature soaring
        architecture are on Hong Kong Island. Across Victoria Harbor, connected
        by ferry and the MTR rail line, is the Kowloon peninsula with its
        hotels, nightlife, and almost non-stop shopping. Beyond, in the New
        Territories, are a mixture of high-rise suburban towns, ancient sites
        and walled villages, country parks, and farms with ducks and fish
        ponds. Hong Kong’s other, less developed islands, Lantau, Lamma, and
        Cheung Chau, provide getaways. You can also take a ferry to Macau to
        find an entirely different kind of city, a unique blend of Chinese and
        Iberian culture.
        It’s anyone’s guess what may happen in the future, but for
        now Hong Kong bristles with energy and ambition, and for the visitor,
        this beautiful city with its contrasts and variety is an exhilarating
        experience.








        What to Do
        Shopping
        Inflation has taken its toll in Hong Kong. While it’s no
        longer the bargain shopping destination it once was, there are still
        some good buys to be had. Since Hong Kong is a duty-free port and
        charges no sales tax, goods are cheaper here than in the country where
        they were made. On photographic equipment, electronic goods, and
        watches, you avoid the luxury tax payable in your home country.
        Specialty goods and souvenirs, often handmade, come from Hong Kong and
        elsewhere in China. Custom-made garments by skillful Hong Kong tailors
        are still much in demand and cost less than elsewhere for comparable
        garments. Note that alcohol and tobacco are both exceptions to Hong
        Kong’s duty-free regime and are subject to tax.
        You’ll find that prices are about the same in Hong Kong
        Central and Kowloon, and somewhat cheaper in Causeway Bay, which caters
        to local shopping. Large shops on the fashionable thoroughfares tend to
        be more expensive than smaller “family” shops tucked away in the side
        streets.
        Stores do not open until 10am or later, but shopping goes on
        into the evening, up to 9:30pm. Most shops are open seven days a week.
        Shops in Central are an exception; they generally close at 6pm and are
        not open on Sunday. The only holiday on which all commerce comes to a
        halt is the Chinese New Year in January or February.
        Buyer Beware. Be aware that name brands, including
        electronics, are sometimes fakes, glass may be sold as jade, and that
        antique you bought may have been made last night. Always ask for a
        receipt that records information about the item, and if you buy an
        antique, be sure to get a certificate of authentication. Needless to
        say, avoid peddlers who approach you on the street and offer to take
        you to wondrous bargains.
        The large department stores have fixed prices, but elsewhere
        you should ask whether there is a discount, especially if you buy
        several items in one shop. Compare prices before you buy any
        significant item. Always ask to see the manufacturer’s guarantee when
        purchasing watches, cameras, and audio-visual and electronic
        equipment.
        Note that when haggling, the merchant assumes you are
        prepared to pay cash. If, after concluding a deal, you try to pay with
        a credit card, he may then boost the price in order to cover the card
        charges.
        It is advisable to shop at outlets that are members of the
        Hong Kong Tourist Association (HKTA), identified by a red junk logo.
        Membership imposes an obligation to maintain standards of both quality
        and service, and provides dissatisfied customers with an officially
        recognized channel for redressing complaints; the number to call is
        Tel. 2508 1234. Pick up a copy of HKTA’s “The Official Dining,
        Entertainment & Shopping Directory” in which all member stores are
        listed.
        Shipping. Many stores will pack and ship purchases. Ask if
        automatic free insurance is provided. If the goods are very valuable or
        fragile, it is a good idea to buy an all-risk insurance for the
        shipment. Packages sent to the US or to Europe generally take six to
        eight weeks by surface mail, and one week by airmail.
        Shopping Areas. Major shopping areas are Tsim Sha Tsui in
        Kowloon, especially along Nathan Road; Central on Hong Kong Island,
        particularly for upscale designer goods; Causeway Bay for slightly
        better prices; and the Hollywood Road area.
        Department Stores. Look for Lane Crawford Ltd., an upscale
        store with branches at Pacific Place, 70 Queen’s Road, and Harbour
        City; Wing On, one of the oldest in Hong Kong; Marks and Spencer; and
        the Japanese department stores, Mitsukoshi, Sobo, and Seibu.
        Malls. Hong Kong is full of giant malls. Harbour City, just
        west of the Star Ferry Terminal in Tsim Sha Tsui is one of the largest;
        Pacific Place, 88 Queensway, is Central’s biggest mall, with retail
        outlets and department stores; Times Square is a collection of retail
        outlets in Causeway Bay. In addition, most top-line hotels have upscale
        malls full of designer boutiques.
        Factory Outlets. These stores sell excess stock or factory
        overruns. Hong Kong is no longer a factory outlet center since much of
        its clothing manufacturing has moved elsewhere. There are factory
        showrooms in the Pedder Building, 12 Pedder Street, in Central.
        Markets. Markets are the places to use your bargaining
        skills. Hong Kong’s most famous and colorful market is the Temple
        Street Night Market near the Jordan MTR stop. Every conceivable kind of
        goods is sold here: clothing, all kinds of electronics, CDs, souvenirs,
        crafts, and jewelry.
        Stanley Market is located on Hong Kong’s southern coast,
        and is well-known for all kinds of clothing, including silk and
        cashmere. Bargain, and carefully examine any merchandise you buy
        here.
        The Jade Market, on Kansu Street in Yau Ma Tei, is known
        for both jade and freshwater pearls. This is not the place to make
        expensive purchases, but it’s great for inexpensive pendants, earrings,
        and gifts.
        What to Buy
        Antiques. Hollywood Road in the Mid-Levels above Central is
        the most famous antiques street in Hong Kong. Look for fine Chinese
        bronzes, embroidery, lacquerware and porcelain, tomb figures, and wood
        carvings, among other possibilities. The experts point out that it is
        not age alone that determines a Chinese antique’s value — the dynasties
        of the past had their creative ups and downs. For serious antiques, try
        Honeychurch Antiques at no. 29 for furniture and silver, Tai Sing
        Company at 122 for porcelain. For fun you can visit the Low Price Shop
        at no. 47 or the Cat Street crafts stores and flea market.
        Brocades and Silks. Fabrics from China are a bargain and
        well worth taking home. Chinese-product department stores stock silk
        fabrics, silk scarves, finely embroidered blouses, and traditional
        padded jackets. Chinese Arts and Crafts is at Pacific Place in Central,
        and in Star House in Tsim Sha Tsui; CRC Department Store is on Hennessy
        Road in Causeway Bay. For fabrics, also try Western Market, Morrison
        Street, in Central.
        Cameras. Photo buffs know that Hong Kong is the place to
        buy some of the world’s most advanced photographic equipment, and there
        are some real bargains around. However, be sure you compare prices and
        models before buying. Two reliable places to start looking in Lan Kwai
        Fong are Photo Scientific in the Eurasia Building and Hing Lee Camera
        Company, 25 Lyndhurst Terrace.
        Carpets and Rugs. Hong Kong is a mecca for Chinese
        hand-knotted wool carpets and silk rugs. Hong Kong’s stores are usually
        able to arrange shipment. Caravan at 65 Hollywood Road and the shops in
        The Silk Road at Ocean Center in Tsim Sha Tsui are good places to start
        looking.
        China (Porcelain). In Hong Kong you can have a plate, or
        even a whole dinner service, hand-painted to your own design. Factories
        in Kowloon and the New Territories, producing traditional and modern
        china, are geared to entertain and instruct visiting tourists; prices
        are appealing. Two of the largest places to go are the Wah Tung China
        Company in the Grand Marine Industrial Building in Aberdeen; and the
        Overjoy Porcelain Factory in Block B of the Kwai Hing Industrial
        Building, Kwai Chung, in the New Territories. In antiques shops, look
        for highly valued porcelains from China. Note that because of the
        duty-free situation, good bargains may be found in European china,
        including Spode and Wedgwood.
        Electronics. The latest gadgets are sometimes available in
        Hong Kong before anywhere else. Before you begin shopping, pick up
        HKTA’s “Shopping Guide to Consumer Electronics. ” Prices on electronics
        have risen in the past two years; check prices at home before you buy
        here. Nathan Road has many electronics shops. Also check out Star
        Computer City in the Star House near the Star Ferry terminal.
        Furniture. The choice ranges from traditional hand-carved
        Chinese rosewood furniture to well-made reproductions of modern Western
        styles. Rattan furniture is highly popular. Hollywood Road has several
        furniture shops. Queen’s Road East in Wan Chai is a furniture
        manufacturing and retail area.
        Jade. “ Good for the health” is just one of the many
        magical qualities that are attributed to these beautiful emerald-green
        or turquoise stones. Real jade is extremely expensive, and you may be
        offered counterfeit jade, which looks exactly like the genuine article.
        Some people say you can test the authenticity by touch — real jade
        feels smooth and cool. Alternatively, you can shine a lamp on the
        stone — real jade shows no reflected light. Better still, go shopping
        with an expert.
        Jewelry. Thanks to the duty-free situation, prices in Hong
        Kong are lower than they are in some other places. You can buy
        gemstones loose or set, or have them made up to your own design.
        Popular purchases include diamonds and freshwater pearls. If you do
        plan to buy jewelry, be sure to consult the “Shopping Guide to
        Jewellery” published by the Hong Kong Tourist Authority to find a
        reputable dealer.
        Kitchen Equipment. Woks and any other gadgets essential for
        Chinese cookery make good purchases. Department stores sell all sorts
        of intriguing kitchen equipment.
        Leather Goods. Leather is not a great bargain in Hong Kong.
        Locally made items do not live up to their European models. However,
        the leather garment industry is growing, and there is a wide range of
        locally produced leather accessories, all at extremely attractive
        prices. For European imports, you will pay top dollar.
        Musical, Audio, and Video Equipment. Hong Kong has a vast
        range of the most high-tech audio-visual, sound, and screen equipment.
        Before purchasing, visitors should make sure of compatibility with
        systems in their own countries. Be sure to look around and compare
        before buying. Whatever you buy, you may be able to work out a
        discount.
        Ready-to-wear Clothes. Hong Kong’s shops carry almost every
        recognizable European and many American labels, from top-end designers
        to the moderately priced or trendy. Nathan Road, Central, and the hotel
        malls are places to look. There are still a great many factory outlet
        stores with reasonable prices. You’ll also find bargain clothes for
        sale at the markets and on push-carts.
        Tailoring. Tailor-made clothes are not as popular in Hong
        Kong as they were in the past, but hundreds of shops still remain.
        Local tailors are experts when it comes to producing custom-tailored
        garments for both men and women, and are also adept at copying
        patterns. The result can be a quality suit at a fair price — but
        made-to-measure clothing is not cheap. In choosing a tailor, look for
        HKTA membership. Many tailors have Web sites or are listed on Web
        sites.
        Tea. Shops all over town will sell you gift tins of exotic
        blends. If you want to learn something about tea, go to the Tea Shop at
        149 Hollywood Road, or the Moon Garden Tea House at 5 Hoi Ping Road,
        Causeway Bay. The owners will brew up a pot so you can taste before
        making a choice.
        Watches. The saying “Time is money” is quite literally true
        in Hong Kong: more is spent on watches and clocks here than on cameras
        and optical goods. An enormous variety of makes and models are on sale.
        Be sure to get the manufacturer’s guarantee stamped or signed if you
        buy a watch.
        Entertainment
        Day and night, the action goes on in this vibrant city. To
        help you choose a nightlife scene, pick up a copy of Hong Kong Tourist
        Authority’s dining and entertainment guide for listings, or just simply
        wander through the maze of neon signs and take your pick. Hong Kong
        Diary published weekly by HKTA tells what’s happening in the arts. Hong
        Kong Life is published by the Hong Kong Standard on Sunday, and the
        South China Morning Post has an entertainment section on Friday.
        Culture buffs are well catered to, and there is always a
        varied program of events, ranging from world-class concerts to local
        amateur dramatic productions.
        A highlight of the arts calendar is the annual Hong Kong
        Arts Festival, a three-week dose of international culture in February,
        with concerts, recitals, plays, jazz, Chinese opera, and innovative
        productions put on by leading talent from both East and West. Tickets
        for the shows must be reserved well in advance. The Festival of Asian
        Arts takes place every other October, bringing to Hong Kong for two
        weeks orchestras, dance groups, opera, and drama companies from all
        over Asia.
        There are more than 30 cinemas in Hong Kong, and the latest
        Western releases are shown in some of the larger ones. English-language
        films have Chinese subtitles. Films with Mandarin dialogue also have
        Chinese subtitles, for the benefit of Cantonese speakers, and sometimes
        subtitles in English.
        The Hong Kong International Film Festival takes place in
        April. More than 200 films from all over the world are shown at this
        two-week event. Ask at City Hall center about advance reservations.
        The Performing Arts
        Performance Venues. The theaters in the Hong Kong Cultural
        Center in Tsim Sha Tsui are the main venues for concerts and opera.
        Other performance centers are the City Hall cultural complex, with
        exhibition halls and theaters that present concerts, plays, and films;
        the Hong Kong Academy for the Performing Arts with two major theaters
        for dance, drama, and concert performances; and the Hong Kong Arts
        Centre in Wan Chai, where both local and visiting groups perform. Other
        centers for concerts, plays, and entertainment are Sha Tin Town Hall
        and Tsuen Wan Town Hall in the New Territories. Larger arenas,
        including the Queen Elizabeth Stadium, the Hong Kong Coliseum, and the
        Ko Shan Theater in Kowloon play host to various concerts, pop concerts,
        sporting events, and variety shows.
        Classical Music. The Hong Kong Chinese Orchestra performs
        new and traditional works; a wide assortment of traditional and Chinese
        instruments are featured. The Hong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra was
        founded in 1975. Under its conductor, David Atherton, it offers Western
        classical works and new works by Chinese composers in a
        September-to-June season.
        Chinese Opera. Cantonese opera is alive and well in Hong
        Kong, and the two other forms, Beijing and Kun, are sometimes
        presented. To most foreigners, this unique art form is likely to be
        inscrutable at first exposure, but everyone can appreciate the
        spectacle and the elaborate, glittering costumes. Although the music
        may seem strange to the unaccustomed ear, it certainly won’t put you to
        sleep; cymbals and drums guarantee your alertness.
        Dance. Hong Kong’s three professional dance companies — the
        Hong Kong Ballet Company, the Hong Kong Dance Company, and the newer
        City Contemporary Dance Company — perform regularly, often at the Hong
        Kong Academy for the Performing Arts.
        Theater. The two leading local troupes, the Chung Ying
        Theatre Company and the Hong Kong Repertory Theatre, perform in
        Cantonese; there are English-language performances at the Fringe Club
        theaters, 2 Lower Albert Road, in Central.
        Puppet Shows. The classic Chinese puppet is the shadow
        puppet, manipulated behind a screen by three rods, but hand puppet and
        marionette shows are also on offer, often for free at public parks and
        playgrounds.
        Nightlife
        Hong Kong by night can suit any taste — riotous, sedate,
        raw, or cultured. Note that sometimes there is a cover charge of HK$50
        to HK$200 at clubs, which may or may not include a couple of
        drinks.
        There are nightclubs in the principal hotels, with bands,
        dancing, and floor shows. Many restaurants and bars have live
        music.
        Jazz fans will find live jazz presented by international
        artists at the Jazz Club and Bar, 2/F, 34-36 D’Agular, Central; and at
        the Blue Note in the Kowloon Shangri-La Hotel in Tsim Sha Tsui. The
        Frin ge Club, 21 Lower Albert Road, Central, is Hong Kong’s best-known
        alternate entertainment venue, with jazz, rock, and other live music,
        in addition to a gallery for visual arts.
        Bars with views and live music include Sky Lounge in the
        Sheraton Hotel and Towers, Tsim Sha Tsui; and Cyrano in the Island
        Shangri-La in Pacific Place. Pubs are numerous. In Tsim Sha Tsui, Ned
        Kelly’s Last Stand on Ashley Road is an Aussie institution; Delaney’s,
        71-77 Peking Road, is one of Hong Kong’s enduring Irish pubs.
        The clubs and bars of Wan Chai, long the center of seedy
        nightlife, have become almost respectable. Joe Bananas, 23 Luard Road,
        is a Wan Chai mainstay for all-night partying. Rick’s Cafe, 78-82 Jaffe
        Road, is a long-time disco that’s still popular. A lot of the raunchy
        action has moved across the harbor to Tsim Sha Tsui East; this is also
        where you’ll find pricey hostess clubs, popular with Japanese tourists,
        but definitely not for those on a budget.
        Today’s trendy spot is Soho (SOuth of HOllywood) around
        Hollywood Road, Elgin, and Stauton streets. Soho, along with the Lan
        Kwai Fong area, is popular with chuppies (Hong Kong yuppies) and has a
        lively bar scene. Causeway Bay also has a variety of bars and clubs.
        TOTT’s, in the Excelsior Hotel, is a restaurant with live music and
        dancing and a harbor view.
        Japanese karaoke bars have now become extremely popular
        with the locals. There are a number of these on Chatham Road South and
        around Cameron Street in Tsim Sha Tsui.
        Nightlife tours are offered by a number of companies. The
        most typical of these are harbor cruises, usually including dinner and
        dancing on board an air-conditioned floating nightclub. There are
        evening bus tours that include visits to a restaurant and night spots;
        some tours combine a Chinese banquet with a visit to an open-air market
        and the panorama from Victoria Peak.
        Sports
        Participant Sports
        Beaches. In subtropical Hong Kong you can swim from April
        to early November. There are more than 40 beaches in Hong Kong that are
        free to the public. Most have lifeguards on duty from April to October,
        changing rooms, toilets, and snack stands. On Hong Kong Island, Repulse
        Bay is the most popular; others are Shek O on the east coast and
        Stanley and Deep Water Bay on the south coast. They are very crowded,
        especially on summer weekends. On the outlying islands, Cheung Chau and
        Cheung Sha are on Lantau, and Hung Shing Ye and Lo So Shing on Lamma;
        inquire about water pollution levels.
        Golf. The Hong Kong Golf Club (Tel. 2812 7070) welcomes
        visitors to its three 18-hole courses at Fanling in the New
        Territories, or the 9-hole course at Deep Water Bay. The Discovery Bay
        Golf Club on Lantau island (Tel. 2987 7273) has an 18-hole Robert Trent
        Jones Jr. course, open to visitors Monday, Tuesday, and Friday. Many
        Hong Kong residents and visitors take the express train to Guangzhou to
        play at the Guangzhou Luhu Golf and Country Club (Tel. 2317 1933 in
        Hong Kong or 020-8350 7777). The 72-par course was designed by Dave
        Thomas.
        Hiking. In the New Territories the famous MacLehose Trail
        stretches 97 km (60 miles) from Sai Kung Peninsula to Tuen Mun. The
        Lantau Trail is a 69-km (43-mile) circular trail on Lantau Island that
        begins and ends at Silvermine Bay. Both trails are divided into smaller
        segments of varying difficulty. Maps of hiking trails are available at
        the Government Publications Center, Low Block, Government Offices, 66
        Queensway in Central. HKTA also has trail maps and sponsors the Guided
        Nature Walks, led by rangers, that include hikes in all the different
        regions of Hong Kong.
        Jogging. Victoria Park has a jogging track in Causeway
        Bay.
        Sailing. Because of the heavy harbor traffic, only sailors
        licensed by the Hong Kong authorities can run pleasure boats in local
        waters. Contact the Hong Kong Yacht Club at Tel. 2832 2817 for
        information.
        Taijiquan (Tai Chi). HKTA offers lessons in these exercises
        that improve concentration and balance at Garden Plaza, Hong Kong Park,
        Admiralty (Tel. 2058 1234).
        Tennis. There are 13 public courts at Victoria Park Tennis
        Centre (Tel. 2570 6168), near Tin Hau Station.
        Spectator Sports
        Horseracing. All levels of society share a feverish
        interest in the Sport of Kings. The racing schedule is September to
        June, and Hong Kong maintains two tracks — the older Happy Valley
        course on Hong Kong Island and the striking Sha Tin track in the New
        Territories. The Hong Kong Tourist Association runs a “Come Horseracing
        Tour,” which includes entry to the Hong Kong Jockey Club visitors’ box
        and members’ enclosure, and a buffet-style meal.
        Cricket. The Hong Kong International Cricket Series, held
        in late September, brings teams from all over the world.
        Rugby. The Rugby Sevens sees teams come together from all
        over the world for 15 matches in March or early April.
        Children’s Hong Kong
        Hong Kong has many attractions that appeal to children of
        all ages. Hong Kong’s many beaches are especially fun for children.
        Children love riding on Hong Kong’s antique trams. A ride on the Peak
        Tram is sure to provide a thrill, and in the Peak Tower they’ll enjoy
        the Peak Explorer ride and Ripley’s Believe it or Not!
        Ocean Park (see page 32) is popular with children of all
        ages. There’s a special Kid’s World that those under 12 can enter free
        when accompanied by a paying adult. The more daring can try out the
        terrifying roller-coaster rides.
        Hong Kong’s state-of-the-art interactive museums will
        interest children of all ages. The Science Museum in Tsim Sha Tsui East
        allows children to get their hands on over half of its 500 exhibits,
        while the nearby Space Museum has regular screenings on an enormous
        Omnimax screen in its Space Theater, making the night sky come
        vibrantly alive.
        For children who love boats, riding the Star Ferry or ferry
        trips to outlying islands will be exciting, and the Dolphin Watch trip
        (see page 113) is certain to appeal. If you plan to visit during May,
        the carnival atmosphere of the Cheung Chau Bun Festival, with its high
        bamboo-and-paper towers covered in sticky buns, will fascinate the
        young ones.








        Where to Go
        T he crowded Kowloon peninsula and the booming New
        Territories on the mainland call for some serious sightseeing; but we
        begin across Victoria Harbor on Hong Kong Island, where the city was
        first founded and which remains the center of government, business, and
        commerce.
        Hong Kong Central
        No matter how many tunnels and transit systems speed
        cross-harbor traffic, nothing matches the ride on the Star Ferry from
        Kowloon to the Central District across Victoria Harbor. As the
        double-decker boats get ready to leave the pier, bells ring, the
        gangplank is raised, deckhands in blue sailor suits man the hawsers,
        and a couple of hundred commuters begin a seven-minute sightseeing
        tour. The big green-and-white boat weaves its way through an
        ever-changing obstacle course of both large and small craft, and the
        soaring skyline of Hong Kong Island draws nearer.
        As you get off, the 52-story Jardine House with
        porthole-shaped windows catches the eye. There are restaurants and a
        Starbuck’s in the basement, and you can access the raised pedestrian
        crosswalk from the escalators on the ground floor. Next to the Jardine
        building is Exchange Square, a complex with a large shopping mall; just
        behind it is the General Post Office with a philatelic center on the
        ground floor.
        Farther west is the ferry terminal for the outlying islands.
        On Connaught Road Central, you’ll find one of Hong Kong’s curiosities,
        the 244-m- (800-ft-) long Mid-Levels outdoor escalator. It ferries
        commuters from the Mid-Levels apartment complexes downhill from 6 to
        10am, and uphill from 10am to midnight. Nearby is Central Market, the
        wholesale food market of Hong Kong, and the Hang Seng building (private
        offices).
        Just east of the Star Ferry terminal, you’ll come to City
        Hall. No longer a center of government, it now functions as a cultural
        center. Go through the underground walkway to Statue Square; on the
        east side of the square is the Legislative Council Building, one of the
        few colonial buildings left in Hong Kong. So great is the pressure on
        the available land that most of Hong Kong’s colonial architectural
        heritage has been demolished and replaced by new skyscrapers. Despite
        protests by preservationists, there was little alternative.
        Nearby is Chater Garden and a number of notable
        architectural landmarks. Most famous is the striking 74-story I.M. Pei
        Bank of China Tower, not beloved by the people of Hong Kong — its
        triangular prisms and sharp angles violate the principles of feng shui
        (see box, page 68) and its radio masts stick up like an insect’s
        antennae. The rival Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank is by architect Norman
        Foster; built on a “coathanger frame,” its floors hang rather than
        ascend. From inside the vast atrium you can view the whole structure as
        well as the mechanical workings of the building. Two bronze lions,
        carrying out feng shui principles, guard its doors.
        You can catch one of Hong Kong’s historic trams along Des
        Voeux Road and ride from Central to Causeway Bay (see box, page 66). In
        1904, the narrow, double-decker trams ran along the waterfront, but
        land reclamation has placed them far inland.
        From the Bank of China Tower, make a short detour up Garden
        Road and turn into Battery Path to reach the landmark St. John’s
        Cathe­dral. Built 1847–1849, this usually deserted Anglican foundation
        is Hong Kong’s oldest church. During World War II, the church was
        turned into a club for Japanese officers; it was restored after the
        war. Note the stained glass windows in the Quiet Chapel, designed by
        Joseph Edward Nuttgens in the late 1950s. Behind the church is the 1917
        French Mission Building, now used as the Court of Final Appeal.
        Across from the I.M. Pei tower a winding path leads up to
        Hong Kong Park. The park’s 10.5 hectares (25 acres) of landscaped
        gardens and lakes contains a large greenhouse that holds many species
        of plants, and an aviary of exotic birds. In the park is the Flagstaff
        House Museum of Tea Ware (see page 54). It’s in Hong Kong’s oldest
        colonial building, with exhibits describing the history of tea from the
        Warring States period (475–221 b.c. ) to the present.
        If you leave the park and walk up Cotton Tree Drive, you
        will find the Peak Tram terminal.
        To the Summit
        For more than a century, the most exhilarating way up
        Victoria Peak has been by funicular. The Peak Tram starts its scenic
        climb just across the street and around the corner from the American
        Consulate in Garden Road and makes its way, sometimes at a startlingly
        steep incline, to the summit at 398 m (1,305 ft). The right-of-way
        travels past fancy apartment blocks, bamboo stands, and jungle flowers.
        Passengers crane their necks for dizzying glimpses of the harbor. The
        Peak is still the most fashionable place to live in Hong Kong, but real
        estate prices here are astronomical; rents run around HK$50,000 a
        month.
        The Peak Tram, originally steam-powered, was built to speed
        the wealthy taipans to their mountainside retreats. Before the tram was
        built, sedan chairs and rickshaws were the only way to get here. Since
        the tram’s inauguration in 1888 it has stopped only for typhoons and
        World War II.
        The modern 120-passenger cars make the journey in around
        eight minutes. However, on sunny Saturdays and Sundays you may have to
        brave a crowd lining up at the lower terminal. During the spring and
        autumn festivals, when people traditionally seek out the hilltops, the
        throngs are so large you would be better advised to try another
        time.
        At the upper terminus there is a four-level shopping
        center, the Peak Galleria, and the Peak Tower, which resembles an
        airport control tower and has shops, entertainment, and
        restaurants.
        You can walk around the peak for impressive views of Hong
        Kong, the coastline, and the islands in 45 minutes on Lugard and
        Harlech roads. The view is especially effective at night. There are
        also souvenir stands, benches for a rest, and perhaps Hong Kong’s last
        surviving rickshaws — however these are not for rides, but are a
        tourist photo opportunity. If you’re up to a climb, take the Mount
        Austin road to the Victoria Peak Gardens. These gardens used to belong
        to the governor’s mountain lodge, but the building was demolished by
        the Japanese during the occupation of Hong Kong.
        From the lower terminal of the Peak Tram it’s only a short
        walk to the former governor’s residence, Government House, now a
        museum. Across from the mansion, the Zoological and Botanical Gardens
        (gardens open daily 6am–10pm; zoo 6am–7pm; admission free) provide a
        welcome oasis amid the big-city pressures. In the very early morning
        the park is taken over by people doing tai-chi exercises. Both young
        and old go through ballet-like movements in slow motion to discipline
        the mind and body. The park’s zoo has a collection of weird and
        wonderful chattering jungle birds.
        More Hong Kong Island Sights
        Western District
        The Western District is one of Hong Kong’s oldest
        neighborhoods, and its narrow streets hold a collection of fascinating
        traditional shops and enterprises. Opposite the Macau Ferry Terminal
        you’ll find the Western Market (open 10am–7pm). It is more interesting
        for its architecture than for its shopping; it’s situated in a
        four-story Edwardian building built in 1906. For an interesting glimpse
        of small and family-owned shops, walk along Bonham Strand East and
        West, Man Wa Lane, and Cleverly Street. You’ll find herb and medicine
        shops, incense shops, chop makers’ shops (makers of Chinese seals), and
        more.
        Hong Kong University’s campus is spread along Bonham Road.
        When it opened in 1912, the university had a total of 72 students. At
        the top of a sloping driveway, the stately Edwardian structure that was
        the original university building presides over the institution’s newer
        buildings. The University’s Fung Ping Shan Museum, 94 Bonham Road (open
        Monday–Saturday 9:30am–6pm, admission free) holds a significant
        collection of antiquities: bronzes, dating from 3000 b.c. , and
        ceramics, including Han Dynasty tomb pottery. It also has the world’s
        largest collection of Nestorian crosses from the Yuan Dynasty
        period.
        Around Hollywood Road
        Take the Mid-Levels Escalator to Hollywood road, known for
        its antiques and curio shopping. Here the windows and open doors of the
        shops reveal an alluring selection of Asian furniture, carpets,
        carvings, tomb figures, porcelain, and bronze.
        Walk west along Hollywood Road until you come to Man Mo
        Temple, the island’s oldest house of worship (though the date of its
        founding is subject to dispute). Visitors entering the temple are
        confronted by a dense pall of smoke from all the burning joss sticks
        and the incense coils hanging from the ceiling (these will burn for as
        long as a month). The gold-plated sedan chairs on the left-hand side of
        the temple were once used for transporting the statues of the temple’s
        gods in religious processions. The statues in the main shrine represent
        Man, the god of literature, and Mo, the god of war, a curious
        juxtaposition. The temple is always crowded with worshipers.
        Just past the temple is the aptly named Ladder Street. Go
        down one flight of steps to Lascar Row, popularly known as Cat Street,
        for more antiques and curio shops. Walk up the steps to reach Caine
        Lane, where you’ll find the Museum of Medical Sciences (open
        Tuesday–Saturday 10am–5pm; admission by donation). The interesting
        Edwardian building was formerly the Pathological Institute, founded to
        combat the 19th century’s 30-year-long outbreak of bubonic plague. The
        old laboratory is still intact, and there are exhibits on Chinese
        pharmacology and the history of medicine in Hong Kong.
        Wan Chai
        Just to the east of the financial district, Wan Chai was
        once an area of sleazy clubs and topless bars; this was the setting for
        The World of Suzy Wong. Servicemen relaxing from the rigors of the
        Vietnam War poured millions of dollars into the Wan Chai boom of the
        1960s. There are still bars and clubs here, but the area has become
        almost mainstream, and office towers are replacing many of the sinful
        old premises.
        The Wan Chai waterfront is dominated by the Hong Kong
        Convention and Exhibition Centre, the largest in Asia, which includes
        hotels, theaters, and exhibition halls. The convention center, an
        extension on reclaimed land, affords stunning views of the Wan Chai
        waterfront. Adjacent, just west of the convention center, is another
        modern highlight, the Academy for the Performing Arts on Gloucester
        Road.
        On Wan Chai’s Bowen Road, Maiden’s Rock, also called
        Lover’s Rock, is the gathering place for the annual Maiden’s festival.
        Although it is not a tourist attraction, the rock is steeped in
        tradition. Every August young women convene to light joss sticks and
        some even climb the nine-meter (30-ft) rock to pray for good
        husbands.
        Causeway Bay
        About 2 km (a mile) east of Wan Chai, Causeway Bay is
        second only to Tsim Sha Tsui as Hong Kong’s place to shop. A prosperous
        tourist district, it is full of shopping centers and department stores,
        along with a number of good restaurants. The busy night-and-day crowds
        make this area vibrant and lively.
        On the nautical side is the Causeway Bay typhoon shelter,
        where expensive yachts are anchored almost gunwale to gunwale, and the
        Hong Kong Yacht Club has its headquarters. Across Gloucester Road,
        opposite the World Trade Centre, is the Noonday Gun, which under
        British rule was sounded on the stroke of midday. Silent for a time,
        the tradition has been revived and is a tourist attraction. It’s not
        clear how the custom started. One story has it that traders Jardine,
        Matheson & Co fired a private salute for a visiting tycoon, an act
        that incensed the colonial authorities, who felt that they had the sole
        right to issue such a 21-gun welcome. As a result, the merchants were
        forced to limit their salvoes to one a day — and from then on, they
        signaled the noon hour daily for all to hear. The gun was made famous
        by Noel Coward’s satirical song, “Mad Dogs and Englishmen. ”
        Farther east is Hong Kong’s largest park, Victoria Park,
        with sports grounds and other facilities. On the eastern side of
        Victoria Park on Causeway Road is Tin Hau Temple, dedicated to Tin Hau,
        the Taoist Queen of Heaven and patroness of seafarers. Originally the
        temple was on the shore but reclamation projects have now left it high
        and dry. On the 23rd day of the Third Moon, the birthday of the goddess
        is celebrated here and in all Hong Kong fishing communities.
        Inland from the bay is Happy Valley. At one time it was a
        very miserable valley, a swampland conducive only to breeding malarial
        mosquitoes. It is home to Hong Kong’s first racetrack. Hong Kong’s
        gamblers are so eager to play the horses that, despite the opening of a
        bigger and better racetrack at Sha Tin, the Happy Valley Racecourse is
        thriving.
        Up Tai Hang Road behind Causeway Bay is Aw Boon Haw (Tiger
        Balm) Gardens (open daily 9:30am–4pm), founded in 1935 by the late Aw
        Boon Haw, who became a millionaire by producing the medicinal Tiger
        Balm. (It does not, in fact, contain any ingredients from tigers, but
        does promise to cure a wide range of problems such as colds, headaches,
        rheumatism, gout, toothache, and scorpion bites. ) With its garish
        pagodas, artificial caves, and brightly painted statues of well-known
        Taoist and Buddhist legends, the garden is an obvious photo
        opportunity.
        around the Coast
        Aberdeen, the island’s oldest settlement, once a pirate
        lair, is home to the “floating population” — the boat people who spend
        their entire lives on the junks in the harbor, some proudly claiming
        never to have set foot on land (except for funerals, which don’t
        count). The junks are a picturesque sight: children frolicking on the
        poop deck, women preparing food or playing mah-jong, elderly folk
        watching the sunset, dogs and cats underfoot, songbirds in bamboo cages
        overhead — and all afloat.
        The boats may appear deceptively primitive, but many of
        them have their own electric generators and all the modern
        conveniences. There are fewer boats now than in the past; many boat
        people, especially the younger generation, have moved to housing
        projects. You can take a tour of the port in one of the small sampans,
        propelled by hand by women drivers. A half-hour tour costs HK$50; pay
        at the end, or the driver may cut your trip short.
        Aberdeen’s theatrical floating restaurants have been a
        tourist attraction for many years. The food may not live up to
        expectations, but the fantasy environment makes up for it. If you can
        get up early enough, you can attend the pre-dawn auction held at the
        vast local wholesale fish market; otherwise, have a look at the street
        market that goes on later in the day.
        The peninsula opposite the east coast of Ap Lei Chau island
        contains Ocean Park (open daily 10am–6pm; admission HK$150 adults,
        HK$75 children), which has become one of Hong Kong’s biggest
        attractions. It is divided into three areas: a highland, a lowland, and
        the Middle Kingdom. Linking the lowland and highland sections of the
        park, a cable-car system offers spectacular views across to the islands
        of the South China Sea.
        The Oceanarium is said to be the largest in the world, and
        the Ocean Theatre features displays by dolphins, killer whales, seals,
        and pelicans. An enormous roller-coaster rising way above the sea,
        space wheels, and high-diving shows guarantee a day of excitement. The
        Middle Kingdom is a recreated “living” history of China’s past,
        presented through a number of full-size replicas of shrines, temples,
        pagodas, palaces, and street scenes. There are also demonstrations of
        traditional Chinese crafts, including silk-weaving, pottery, and p
        apermaking. Water World, formerly in the complex, has closed for
        redevelopment.
        Continuing around the coast in a counter-clockwise
        direction, Deep Water Bay offers a good beach and harbors. The next
        inlet is Repulse Bay, a roomy, sandy crescent, with green hills. It’s
        so attractive and so easy to reach that it’s packed with sunbathers all
        summer long.
        Stanley was once one of the main fishing villages on Hong
        Kong Island. The well-known Stanley Mar­ket (see page 55) is a major
        source for bargain clothing and other merchandise. Stanley is also a
        favorite place of residence for ex-pats. The waterfronts at Repulse Bay
        and Stanley are lined with good cafés and restaurants.
        Kowloon
        Though much smaller than Hong Kong Island, Kowloon has
        almost twice the population. In many areas, the density reaches the
        equivalent of 150,000 inhabitants per square km (a quarter square
        mile).
        Most of Kowloon’s attractions for visitors are centered
        near the tip of the peninsula in the district known as Tsim Sha Tsui.
        Adjacent to the Star Ferry terminal is Ocean Terminal, where
        international cruise ships dock, and the gigantic Harbour City, a
        complex of malls, hotels, and restaurants.
        If you walk east on the Star Ferry terminal concourse, you
        will find yourself on the wonderful Promenade, which begins at the
        clock tower, all that remains of the once grand Kowloon-Canton Railway
        Terminus. The waterfront here offers unparalled views of the harbor and
        Hong Kong Island. If you continue to the end of the promenade, you will
        be in Tsim Sha Tsui East, a busy commercial district built on more than
        60 hectares (150 acres) of reclaimed land.
        Flanked by the clock tower is the imposing Hong Kong
        Cultural Centre. Hong Kong’s major venue for the performing arts, the
        building has been criticized for its fortress-like architecture and
        windowless façade. The interior is a comfortable amalgam of Chinese and
        Western design, with an impressive main lobby. The center contains a
        concert hall with acclaimed acoustics, theaters, a library, an
        exhibition gallery, shops, restaurants, and bars.
        Next door is the Hong Kong Space Museum and Theatre (open
        Monday, Wed­nesday–Friday 1–9pm; Sat­ur­day, Sunday 10am–9pm; closed
        Tuesday; admission HK$10 adults, HK$5 children; separate admission to
        theater). Its futuristic dome design is striking; inside are
        interactive exhibits, including one in which you can experience
        weightlessness. The theater presents “sky shows” and IMAX films. The
        Hong Kong Museum of Art (see page 54) stands behind the Space Museum
        next to the cultural center. It contains the Xubaizhi collection of
        painting and calligraphy; galleries devoted to antiquities and
        ceramics; and a gallery of modern Chinese art. Particularly interesting
        is the collection of paintings and photographs of old Hong Kong. The
        museum mounts special exhibitions and has an excellent gift shop.
        A few blocks up Chatham Road South are two more major
        museums. The Scien­ce Mus­eum (see page 55) is a state-of-the-art
        interactive museum that will teach you how everything and anything
        works from ancient sailing ships to the latest technology. The Museum
        of History (open Tuesday–Saturday 10am–6pm, Sunday 1–6pm; closed
        Monday; admission HK$10 adult, HK$5 child) opened its new permanent
        collection at the end of August 2001. The fascinating collection of
        artifacts pertaining showcases 6,000 years of Hong Kong’s history and
        Chinese culture.
        Just across Salisbury Road from the cultural center is the
        historic Peninsula Hotel, now expanded and modernized by a 32-story
        tower. Its restored lobby is Hong Kong’s most elegant gathering place;
        afternoon tea here is a visitors’ ritual.
        Alongside the hotel runs busy Nathan Road, Hong Kong’s
        fabled shopping street, lined with shops, hotels, and restaurants.
        Kowloon’s main street was created by Sir Matthew Nathan when he was
        governor of Hong Kong at the turn of the 19th century. At the time it
        was built, many thought it absurd to have a tree-lined boulevard
        running through what was practically a wilderness. Now the former
        “Nathan’s Folly” is known as the “Golden Mile. ”
        A few blocks up Nathan Road is Kowloon Park (open daily
        6am–midnight), elegantly laid out with fountains, promenades, and
        ornamental gardens; be sure to go up the steps to see the Sculpture
        Walk.
        Farther up Nathan Street you will reach Yau Ma Tei, one of
        the older parts of Kowloon. Turn off Nathan and walk down Kansu Street
        to find the Jade Market (open 10am–3pm; see page 80), with more than
        100 stalls spread out in a large tent, just before you reach the
        overpass.
        Hong Kong’s liveliest market scene is the Temple Street
        Night Market (see page 55), near Jordan Road. Everything is sold here,
        from clothing to souvenirs to electronic goods, and the market is known
        for its street-side food stalls, where you can dine inexpensively on
        seafood. The market runs all the way up to Tin Hau Temple, where you
        will find fortune tellers’ tables (some speak English) and possibly
        street performers singing Chinese opera or pop songs. The temple is one
        of the many dedicated to Tin Hau, goddess of seafarers; this one also
        houses an altar to Shing Wong, the city’s god. In the daytime the
        temple (open 8am–6pm) attracts worshipers, and its park attracts
        strollers and mah-jong players.
        Nathan Road goes all the way up to Boundary Street, which
        marks the boundary between Kowloon and the New Territories. Near
        Boundary Street, off Prince Edward Street West, is the Yuen Po Street
        Bird Garden (open 8am–7pm). Birds are favorite pets in Hong Kong,
        valued for their singing rather than their plumage, and here you’ll
        find all kinds of birds for sale as well as elaborate teak and bamboo
        cages.
        Off the beaten path in Sham Shui Po, west of the junction
        of Nathan Road and Boundary Street, is the Lei Cheng Uk Han Tomb and
        Museum on Tonkin Road (open Monday–Wednesday and Friday–Saturday
        10am–6pm, Sunday 1–6pm; closed Thursday). This ancient burial vault is
        believed to date back to the Han Dynasty (a.d. 25–220). The
        barrel-vaulted chambers were discovered while excavating for a nearby
        housing project.
        New Territories
        Hong Kong’s New Territories begin at Boundary Street.
        Surprises spring up on all sides: new industrial complexes alongside
        sleepy farming villages, skyscraper towns blooming in the middle of
        nowhere, Hakka women in their traditional flat straw hats with hanging
        black curtains, water buffalo, and flashes of azalea everywhere.
        The New Territories can be explored by taking the
        Kowloon–Canton Railway (KCR), which makes 10 stops between the station
        in Kowloon and Sheung Shui, the last stop before entering China. Ask
        the tourist authority about its interesting Heritage Tour from Kowloon
        and other countryside tours (see page 113).
        The main highway makes a circuit of the New Territories,
        beginning with the new town of Tsuen Wan, situated in an area of heavy
        industry just west of Kowloon. North of the town, a commanding view
        over all the New Territories to the north can be seen from Tai Mo Shan,
        Hong Kong’s highest peak at 957 m (3,140 ft). The highway continues
        parallel to the coast. One-third of all Hong Kong’s beaches are to be
        found in a single 14-km (9-mile) stretch of this region’s shoreline.
        Place names are often based on the distance to the nearest mile-post,
        as measured from the tip of the Kowloon peninsula. Thus you will find
        “191/2-mile Beach” at Castle Peak Bay.
        The main road continues clockwise around the New
        Territories. As you approach the border, you can glimpse the
        skyscrapers of Shenzhen. The lookout point at Lok Ma Chau was once
        known as Hong Kong’s “window on China” — in the years of China’s
        isolation from the West, tourists would come to the lookout point here
        and rent binoculars in order to get a glimpse of the great mystery
        beyond.
        Set amid Tseun Wan’s residential towers is the 18th-century
        walled village of Sam Tung Uk, now preserved as a museum, and a short
        walk from the MTR station. Not far away, at milepost 21 near the large
        new town of Tuen Mun, is a Taoist retreat known as Ching Chung Koon.
        This “Temple of Green Pines” is a spacious complex containing temples
        and pavilions, statues, and gardens. It is known for its collection of
        bonsai and houses a jade seal more than 1,000 years old. Among the
        ponds is one inhabited by turtles: Visitors toss in coins in the hope
        of bouncing one off a turtle’s head, a sure way of achieving good
        fortune.
        An even more interesting image out of Chinese history is
        the walled village of Kat Hing Wai, in the village of Kam Tin just
        outside the market town of Yuen Long. This is the most easily
        accessible of the New Territories’ walled villages. It is built in a
        square, and the only way in is through the gate in the brick defensive
        wall. Kat Hing Wai was built four or five centuries ago by the Hakka
        Tang clan, one of the Five Great Clans that migrated here from North
        China (see page 11). Many of the old houses in the village have been
        replaced by modern structures.
        The Tang clan’s earliest walled village was Lo Wai, which
        also has its defensive wall intact and is entered by a narrow gate.
        Adjacent to the village is the restored Tang Chung Ling Ancestral Hall.
        Few traditional ancestral halls remain in China since the
        anti-historical destruction during the Cultural Revolution, so these
        New Territories ancestral halls are rare survivors. Another such hall,
        belonging to the Liu Clan, is Liu Man Shek Tong in the village of
        Sheung Shui.
        One of the most interesting sites in the New Territories is
        Tai Fu Tai, another rare survivor, this one a mansion that belonged to
        a Confucian high official. The house was built in 1865 by a member of
        the Man clan who achieved the rank of tai fu (mandarin) by doing well
        in the Imperial Exam­inations. The preservation of this wonderful home
        is ongoing; a projected restoration of the original garden is still in
        progress. The traditional Qing Dyna­sty style of the mansion is
        enlivened by a few West­ern touches: a Baroque-style ceiling and
        stained glass above the doorways, showing the builder’s up-to-date
        attitude at the time of construction.
        The highway and the railway stay close together from
        Fanling, site of the best golf courses in the area. Tai Po, just south
        of Fanling, is known for its market, Tai Po Market, which buzzes with
        activity daily from 7am to 6pm. Just up a lane from the market is the
        Man Mo Temple, with long-burning incense coils hanging from its
        ceiling, a popular spot dedicated to the Taoist gods of war and
        literature.
        The railway line then curves gracefully around Tolo Harbor,
        an idyllic body of water well-protected from the open sea. You can take
        a ferryboat through the harbor, past the ingenious Plover Cove
        reservoir, a water catchment area appropriated by damming and draining
        a broad inlet from the sea. The boats go on to the friendly fishermen’s
        island of Tap Mun, in Mirs Bay, with stops in remote hamlets of the Sai
        Kung Peninsula. The Sai Kung area is the location of two official parks
        and nature preserves, while on the south side of the peninsula are some
        of the territory’s best beaches.
        From the next railway station, the modern campus of the
        Chinese University of Hong Kong is visible. Teaching here is conducted
        in both Chinese and English. The Art Gallery in the Institute of
        Chinese Studies Building is worth a visit for its painting and
        calligraphy collections.
        Sha Tin is the site of the Monastery of 10,000 Buddhas,
        which looks down on a burgeoning town. There are hundreds of stone
        steps in the hillside to walk up before you reach Man Fat Temple with
        its regiments of small gilt statues of Buddha lining the walls. Some
        indefatigable climbers will want to go up to the top of the nine-story
        pink pagoda for a panoramic view. There is a total of 12,800 Buddha
        statues here, plus the remains of the monastery’s founder embalmed in
        gold leaf. Also here is the Hongkong Heritage Museum (call Tel. 2180
        8188 for open hours). The museum has an art collection, and displays of
        toys and other artifacts.
        Down to earth, the Sha Tin Racecourse can accommodate over
        80,000 spectators and is equipped with every imaginable luxury,
        including a giant video screen facing the stands, and for the horses,
        air-conditioned stables. Opposite the Sha Tin railway station, New Town
        Plaza features shops, cinemas, and even a computer-controlled musical
        fountain.
        Two natural rock formations are always pointed out on
        excursions. Sha Tin Rock, better known as Amah Rock, is actually a pile
        of several rocks that resemble a woman with a baby in a sling on her
        back. Legend has it that a local woman climbed the hill every day to
        watch for her husband returning from across the sea; one day the wife
        and her child were turned to stone as a permanent symbol of her
        enduring faith. Closer to town is Lion Rock, shaped like a lion lying
        in wait. It really looks the part; the tourists know its name even
        before the guide can translate it.
        The Islands
        Excursion companies sell a variety of orientation cruises
        of Hong Kong harbor that include a look at some of its 235 outlying
        islands. These pleasant, but expensive, outings can lay the foundation
        for your own explorations aboard the cheap but usually comfortable
        ferries used by the islanders themselves. From the ferry terminals on
        Hong Kong Island you can escape to islands without cars or cares, where
        the local people smile “hello” and, if you’re lucky, point you to a
        secret beach for the ultimate in quality leisure time. For ferry
        information, call Tel. 2542 3081 or 2525 1108.
        Lantau Island
        The mountainous island of Lantau is the biggest in the
        colony, and covers nearly twice the area of Hong Kong Island. Chek Lap
        Kok airport sits on reclaimed land just off Lantau; plans to build a
        bridge may change Lantau, but at present it is sparsely populated and
        makes a perfect getaway.
        At 934 m (3,064 ft), Lantau Peak is high enough to attract
        the occasional rain cloud — refreshingly cool breezes blow on most hot
        summer days. More than half the island is parkland, and there is a
        70-km (45-mile) circular hiking trail (see page 92). Ferries depart
        from Central every two hours between 6:10am and 10:30pm to Silvermine
        Bay (Mui Wo), where a bus terminal has buses to all parts of the
        island. There are also ferries to Discovery Bay.
        A short bus ride away is Cheung Sha Beach, 3 km (2 miles)
        long, and popular for its white sand and excellent facilities.
        The most famous site on the island is the world’s tallest
        seated bronze statue of Buddha at 22 m (72.6 ft), the Tiantan Buddha
        (see page 55). The statue and a small museum are on a peak, up 268
        steps, above Po Lin Monastery. The monastery is strictly vegetarian,
        and visitors are warned not to bring any meat with them. You can have a
        delicious vegetarian lunch here.
        From the monastery, hikers enjoy the two-hour cross-country
        trek down to Silvermine Bay, but the authorities have warned walkers to
        be on the lookout for snakes, which can be plentiful in the Lantau
        hinterland, especially in summer. The hillsides that surround the
        monastery are the site of Hong Kong’s only tea plantation. Visitors are
        welcome to visit the 24-hectare (60-acre) establishment, and may sample
        the end product, Lantau tea.
        The island’s largest community is Tai O. The people of this
        picturesque village make their living by fishing, duck-breeding, and
        food-processing. Many of the inhabitants live — by choice, not
        necessarily through economic hardship — on the water, aboard houseboats
        or in houses on stilts in the main creek.
        A Trappist monastery, situated on a hillside overlooking
        the east coast of Lantau, is also open to visitors. To get here, follow
        the path from the southwest end of Discovery Bay; the walk takes about
        30 minutes.
        Cheung Chau
        Some 10 km (6 miles) west of Hong Kong lies this small,
        crowded island, only one square mile in size. More than 25,000 people
        live here, mostly by fishing, but there are also ex-pats, attracted by
        its laid-back Mediterranean ambience. The island has a checkered past
        of smuggling and pira cy. That era is gone now, but other elements of
        the island’s old life are preserved. The people still carve jade and
        build seaworthy junks, all by hand. Fish (heads discreetly wrapped in
        paper) are still hung out to dry in the sun.
        Cheung Chau becomes the center of Hong Kong life once a
        year, usually in May, during the Bun Festival, a folklore extravaganza
        (see page 89). The rest of the year, life goes on at its accustomed
        pace: rickety machines chugging in two-man factories, children in
        school uniforms being ferried home to houseboats, and the old fishermen
        stirring shrimp paste.
        By way of formal tourist attractions, Pak Tai Temple, built
        in 1783, has some fine carvings and a great iron sword said to be 600
        years old. But the most interesting thing to do here is to explore the
        two villages on the island, Cheung Chau and San Wai. They are an easy
        walk apart by the harbor road, or a longer 45-minute hike on the scenic
        Peak Road. The Praya, the promenade in front of the ferry pier, is a
        good place to observe the many junks and fishing boats in the harbor.
        There are also several open-air restaurants where you can enjoy fresh
        seafood.
        Lamma Island
        Only 35 minutes by ferry from Central, Lamma Island is
        perfect for swimming, hiking, picnicking, birdwatching, or just sitting
        back to watch the bananas grow. Hong Kong’s third largest island has a
        population of only about 12,000; it is still largely undeveloped, and
        life on Lamma, if not totally primitive, is close to the essentials.
        Archaeologists indicate that Lamma has probably been inhabited for some
        4,000 years, and the island is known as “Hong Kong’s Stone Age Island.
        ”
        The principal settlements are Yung Shue Wan on Lamma’s
        northwest, and Sok Kwu Wan, on the east coast. Both villages offer good
        waterfront restaurants with homestyle Chinese food, principally seafood
        fresh from the tank. The ports are within hiking distance of several
        beautiful beaches, and within a one-hour hike of each other on a marked
        trail. You can build an appetite for dinner by making your way from the
        beach to the restaurant. Yung Shue Wan is still a very British
        residential enclave, with many nice pubs.
        An Excursion to Macau
        Macau, the final bastion of Portugal’s great 16th-century
        empire, is much more than just a quirk of history. Here, where East and
        West first met, life combines the spirit of Asia with something of the
        sunny atmosphere of the Mediterranean.
        Macau’s historic center, with its colonial architecture,
        has a distinctly Medit­er­ranean flavor. Col­­o­n­na­­ded public
        buildings, iron balconies, winding streets, flagstoned squares and the
        many churches all speak of the Portuguese inheritance as well as the
        Chinese, a fusion of East and West that has produced the unique
        Macanese culture.
        The story of the Western discovery of Macau begins in 1513
        when Portuguese explorer, Jorge Alvares, reached the south coast of
        China. Traders followed in his wake, setting up bases in several parts
        of the Pearl River estuary. Finally, in 1557, they were all
        consolidated in Macau. It was the only European gateway to China, and
        through Macau flowed Western technology and religion. In 1576 Pope
        Gregory XIII created the Macau diocese, covering all of China and
        Japan.
        No less impressive were the secular challenges. China and
        Japan were not on speaking terms, so trade between them had to be
        channeled through a neutral middleman. Lucky Macau fit the
        specifications exactly. Portugal’s resulting near-monopoly of East–West
        trade understandably awakened the competitive instincts of other
        European powers. The Dutch sent an invasion flotilla to Macau in 1622,
        but the defenders triumphed. However, the end of the golden age was
        drawing near. China began to relax trade restrictions, and with the
        rise of Hong Kong, Macau became an isolated Portuguese outpost.
        A haven for persecuted Japanese Christians in the 17th
        century, Portugal’s neutrality during World War II assured the
        territory a flood of refugees. They were joined by a swarm of spies of
        all conceivable nationalities, and Macau won a name for international
        intrigue.
        Portugal’s very precarious foothold on the Asian coast
        ended in 1999 with a formal handover to China. Macau, now the Chinese
        Special Economic Zone of Zhuhai, is becoming something like a boomtown
        as an exporter of toys, furniture, and electronics. New construction in
        the past 10 years has changed the city’s skyline; with new, glittering
        hotels and highrise apartment blocks, the city is beginning to look a
        little more like Hong Kong.
        Macau’s population is estimated at around 450,000, an
        appallingly high figure for such a small area; recent land reclamation
        has eased the situation to some extent. If a trace of tropical lethargy
        still adds to the charm in this city of sidewalk cafés, palm trees, and
        pedicabs, any torpor definitely ends once inside the doors of Macau’s
        casinos, scene of some of the liveliest gambling west of Las Vegas.
        Gambling provides almost 40 percent of the government’s tax revenues,
        and is a major source of employment. Its spin-off industries,
        prostitution and pawn shops, also thrive.
        Arriving
        The easiest way to get to Macau is by jetfoil, operated by
        TurboJet (Tel. 2859-3333). The 40-mile trip takes about an hour.
        Departures are from the Macau Ferry Terminal, just west of Central in
        the Shun Tak Centre, 200 Connaught Road, Central, in Hong Kong.
        Jetfoils leave every 15 to 30 minutes 24 hours a day.
        Entry procedures are similar to those in Hong Kong — most
        nationalities need only a passport to enter Macau. Macau’s own
        currency, the pataca, is pegged to the Hong Kong dollar, and you can
        use your Hong Kong currency freely in Macau.
        Upon arrival in Macau, be sure to stop by the Macau
        Government Tourist Office for a map, brochures, and directions. Outside
        the terminal, you will find taxis as well as buses to all points (take
        3, 3A, 10, or 10A to the historic center; exact change is required).
        You’ll also be approached by pedicab drivers; these are tricycles
        carrying two passengers. Pedicabs were once the most common form of
        transportation in Macau, but today they are mainly a tourist
        attraction.
        Sights in Macau
        Directly across the street from the wharf where passengers
        arrive from Hong Kong is the first surprise to greet visitors to
        Macau — the vast Jai-alai Palace, said to be the world’s most luxurious
        frontón. In an effort to provide yet one more thing to bet on, players
        are imported from Spain to take part in this lightning-fast Basque ball
        game.
        The grandstand situated on the seaside road, the Avenida
        da Amizade (Friendship Avenue), marks the finishing line for the Macau
        Grand Prix, the international car-racing event held here every
        November. Also in front of the ferry terminal is a new Cyber fountain,
        with 86 water spouts that shoot up to 70 m (230 ft) and are illuminated
        at night by 288 spotlights producing 80 colors.
        Continuing around the peninsula in a clockwise direction
        brings you to the Rua da Praia Grande (Big Beach Street) — a pleasant
        promenade with shaded benches under the banyan trees. Along this
        elegant avenue is Government House, a modest pink palace.
        The central square of the historic city center is Largo do
        Senado. For an authentic feel of old Portugal, slip into the cool
        entrance hall of theimpressive Leal Senado (“Loyal Senate” building), a
        fine example of colonial architecture. On the inside walls are flowered
        blue tiles (azulejos) and coats of arms. The inscription over the
        archway reads, “Cidade do nome de Deus, não ha outra mais leal” (“City
        of the Name of God, None is More Loyal”) — a bit of praise attributed
        to Portugal’s King John IV in the 17th century. For all its historic
        grandeur, the loyal Senate now is the equivalent of a city council, its
        statesmanship dedicated to water supplies, sewage lines, and the
        establishment of playgrounds.
        Macau’s most memorable monument is the Baroque façade of
        the ruins of São Paulo, the only remains of a beautiful 17th-century
        Jesuit church. On top of a hill in the center of the city, it’s
        approached by a grand staircase. The rest of the building and an
        adjoining college were destroyed in a typhoon-fanned fire in 1835. The
        rich sculptural effects on the façade mix Eastern and Western symbols:
        familiar saints, Chinese dragons, and a Portuguese caravel. Beneath the
        church, the Museum of Sacred Art houses a collection of sacramental
        objects.
        The ambitious Museum of Macau (open Tuesday–Sunday
        10am–6pm; admission HK$15) opened in 1998 in the lower levels of the
        Monte Fortress. Entrance is by escalator, near St. Paul’s. It gives an
        overview of Macau’s history and its daily life and traditions. A
        re-created street of colonial Macau is lined with traditional Chinese
        shops. The fort, built by the Jesuits in the 17th century as a defense
        against the Dutch, was largely destroyed by the same fire that burned
        St. Paul’s.
        Luís Vaz de Camões (1524–1580), the Portuguese national
        poet whose work immortalized that country’s golden age of discoveries,
        may have stayed in Macau. Local legend claims that he wrote part of his
        great saga, Os Lusíadas, in what is now called the Camões Grotto,
        situated in the spacious tropical Camões Garden.
        Next to the museum, behind a gate (opened to anyone who
        knocks), is the Old Protestant Cemetery. Those whose fate was to die on
        some far foreign field could not have wanted a more peaceful, lovely
        graveyard. The small, whitewashed chapelwas the first Protestant church
        built in China.
        For a different vision of Old China, spend a few quiet
        moments in the classic Lou Lim Ieoc Garden. Here, arched bridges,
        pagodas, fish ponds, and stands of bamboo create the mood of a timeless
        Chinese painting. Nearby is the Memorial House of Dr. Sun Yat-sen,
        founder of the Chinese Republic. Photos and documents tell the life
        story of the physician-revolutionary-statesman, who lived for a time in
        Macau, but never in this building.
        Kun Iam Tong, off Avenida do Coronel Mesquita (open daily
        8am–6pm), is a 17th-century Buddhist temple of considerable splendor
        and charm. Surrounded by statues, carvings, and incense burners, here
        the faithful make their devotions and check their fortunes, and
        traditional funerary displays give a cheerful send-off to the recently
        departed.
        An unexpected piece of historical memorabilia turns up in
        the monastery garden, where guides point out a small stone table used
        for a treaty-signing ceremony in 1844. The signatories, who were the
        Chinese viceroy from Canton and the minister plenipotentiary of the
        United States of America, put their names to a historic document — the
        first-ever treaty between the two countries.
        Another important ceremony took place in 1999 when Macau
        became part of China. The Handover Pavilion was meant to be a temporary
        structure, but public outcry ensured its preservation (located on Xian
        Xing Hai; open weekdays 10am–6pm, until 10pm weekends). Nearby is the
        Macau Cultural Center and the Museum of Art (open Tuesday–Sunday
        10am–7pm; closed Monday; small admission). ­
        Macau’s oldest museum, the Maritime Museum
        (Wednesday–Monday 10am–5:30pm; admission HK$10, HK$5 children over 10)
        traces the history of Macau’s connection to the sea. Exhibits cover
        fishing, seaborne trade, sea transport, and there is an aquarium. The
        museum also offers boat tours aboard a fishing junk.
        The museum is almost on the spot where the Portuguese
        first landed. When they came ashore they found the A-Ma Temple
        (properly called Ma Kok Temple; open daily dawn to dusk), dedicated to
        the favorite goddess of fishermen, who is also known as Tin Hau. The
        area was called A-Ma Gau (“Bay of A-Ma”), and in this way, Macau got
        its name. The ornate, picturesque temple dates from the Ming Dynasty
        (1368–1644) and is the oldest building in Macau.
        The remains of the 17th-century Barra Fortress, which once
        defended the southern tip of the peninsula, contains the chapel of
        Santiago (St. James). The saint is much revered in the surrounding
        area. Among other legends surrounding the statue is a very modern one:
        During the Chinese Cultural Revolution, when Red Guards were running
        rampant on Wanchai island, just a swim away, the image of St. James is
        said to have stepped down from the altar and halted an invasion. Part
        of the fortress has been converted and is now used as a luxury inn. The
        northernmost point in Macau is the frontier between two contrasting
        worlds. The Barrier Gate (Portas do Cerco), which was built more than a
        century ago, marks the boundary between the enclave of Macau and the
        People’s Republic of China.
        Trying Your Luck
        Macau’s casinos are a source of non-stop excitement. There
        are 12 of them; you can’t miss the eye-popping Lisboa, which has
        several floors of gambling, but there’s also the Hyatt Regency, the
        Mandarian Oriental, and Taipa’s Jockey Club. The fancifully decorated
        Macau Palace, a floating casino moored on the western waterfront, is
        fitted out with gambling tables, slot machines (known locally as
        “hungry tigers”) and, for hungry humans, a restaurant. Gambling is
        wildly popular with the Chinese of Hong Kong, and they make up nearly
        80 percent of all visitors to the casinos.
        The casinos offer familiar international games — baccarat,
        blackjack, boule, craps, roulette — along with more exotic Chinese
        pastimes. Watch the fantan dealer for a few minutes and you’ll almost
        be an expert: It’s simply a matter of how many odd buttons are left
        after he has divided a pile of them into groups of four.
        Dai-Siu (Big and Small) is a dice game in which the
        croupier throws three dice inside a glass container. Players bet on the
        numbers that will come up, and on whether the result will be “big” or
        “small. ” Keno is a variation of bingo in which the player chooses
        numbers to bet on before the draw is made.
        The casinos have no admission charge and formal dress is
        optional, though long pants for men are required. They keep busy 24
        hours a day, but if you want a change of scene there are always more
        gambling opportunities available. You can try your luck at pari mutuel
        betting on jai-alai at pari mutuel, greyhound-racing at the Cani­drome
        (one of the largest in the world), and harness-racing on Taipa.
        Shopping in Macau
        Like Hong Kong, Macau is a duty-free port. It is famous
        for its gold jewelry. Market prices per tael (34 grams/1.2 ounces) of
        gold are set daily. You should always ask for a certificate of
        guarantee when you buy gold or jewelry. Look for jewelry shops along
        Avenida do Infante D. Henrique and Avenida de Almei­da Ribeiro.
        Browsing is a real pleasure in Macau’s main streets and
        byways, where shops aimed at the tourist market are interspersed with
        the more workaday ironmongers, herbalists, and noodle stalls.
        Knowle­dgeable visitors look for antiques — either Chinese heirlooms or
        leftovers from the gracious Portuguese colonial days. However, you are
        not likely to find bargains, and you should be aware that unless you
        are an expert, you can end up with a fake. Also worth investigating are
        contemporary handicrafts, both Portuguese and Chinese, from across the
        border.
        Food and Drink
        Gourmets award Macau high marks for dependable Chinese
        cooking with an exotic bonus: Portuguese food and wines. Macau’s own
        cuisine is a combination of Chinese flavors with the flavors imported
        from Portugal, Brazil, and Africa. Whether you choose to dine in one of
        the Macanese, Chinese, traditional Portuguese, or international-style
        restaurants, you will be treated to a hearty meal at a good price.
        The ingredients, especially the fresh fish and seafood,
        are first-rate. A delicate, delicious fish is Macau sole (linguado).
        Imported dried cod (bacalhao) is the Portuguese national dish; several
        varieties are available, usually baked.
        Macau has an ample supply of Portuguese wines. Try a vinho
        verde, a mildly sparkling young wine from northern Portugal, or a
        hearty red Dão or Colares. After dinner, a glass of Madeira or port is
        recommended to round off the meal. The more abstemious can stick to
        Portuguese mineral water.
        Taipa and Coloane
        Bridges link Macau with its two islands. Since the
        construction of the New Macau-Taipa Bridge has allowed easy access to
        the airport, the population has grown to more than 30,000, with
        industrial development, new apartment blocks, and luxury resort
        hotels.
        The quaint Taipa Village, with its narrow lanes and
        colonial buildings painted yellow, blue, and green, has almost been
        completely swallowed up by the development of nearby housing projects.
        The island is also the designated home of the University of East Asia.
        Pay a visit to the Casa Museu da Taipa, and you’ll be able to get a
        glimpse of how Macanese families lived in former days. A grand colonial
        house, fully restored and outfitted with period furnishings, provides
        the centerpiece for this expanding “cultural village. ”
        Farther away is Coloane, connected to Taipa by a causeway
        and a large land reclamation project. Not as developed as Taipa, it
        offers the joys of sand and sea and is known for its beaches. Cheoc Van
        and Hac Sa (“Black Sands”) are both popular resort areas, with
        lifeguards on duty in summer and windsurfing boards for rent. There are
        restaurants, swimming pools, and changing facilities. The village of
        Coloane is picturesque, with a central square lined with cafés. The
        waterfront drive parallels the shore of a Chinese island, and boats
        headed to China pass through the narrow waterway. The small Chapel of
        St. Francis Xavier is dedicated to the 16th-century patron saint of
        missionaries, and has on display the elbow of the saint, along with the
        bones of numerous Japanese and Vietnamese martyrs.
        Seac Pai Van Park, on the west coast of the island is an
        interesting natural preserve with aNatural History Museum.
        An Excursion to Guangzhou (Canton)
        Guangzhou was China’s major seaport for 2,000 years and
        the center for European traders in the 19th century. The city still
        maintains its important gateway role. Ever since 1957 the Canton Trade
        Fair (officially the Chinese Export Commodities Fair) has attracted
        throngs of international business people every spring and autumn.
        Guangzhou, with a population of more than 5 million,
        straddles the Pearl River — China’s fifth longest — which links the
        city to the South China Sea. This waterway accounts for much of the
        local charm and excitement, as the daily drama of the ferryboats,
        junks, sampans, freighters — and even small tankers and big
        gunboats — unfolds right in the center of town. The river also
        irrigates the carefully tended surrounding farmlands, creating a
        beautifully lush, subtropical scene. Guangdong Province has some of
        China’s most fertile land, and grows two crops of rice a year, along
        with vegetables of all kinds.
        Guangzhou today is mostly about business and industry,
        featuring new development, skyscrapers, a whole new business area, and
        raised expressways. The scary traffic is a real experience — vehicles
        of all kinds jockey for position on crowded streets, missing each other
        by inches, and speeding on the freeways is rampant. Guangzhou is
        interestingly one of China’s most prosperous cities, determinedly on
        the move into the modern world. It seems that the picturesque older
        sections with their old houses, narrow streets, and winding alleyways
        may not be around much longer.
        Arriving in Guangzhou
        There are many package tours to Guangzhou from Hong Kong
        (see page 113), and this may be the easiest way to visit the city.
        However, it’s also easy to get to Guangzhou by train or ferry. Four
        comfortable express trains depart the Kowloon-Canton Railway (KCR)
        Station in Hung Hom, Kowloon, making the trip in less than two hours.
        Turbo Cat ferries leave the China Hong Kong City (CHKC) terminal twice
        a day; the journey takes two hours. Citibus also travels to Guangzhou
        from CHKC; there are five round-trips a day, taking 31/2 hours.
        You will need a visa to enter China (see page 109 for
        information). Hong Kong currency is widely accepted in Guangzhou, or
        you can change your currency into RMB (yuan) at any bank or hotel.
        Note, however, that the exchange does not go the other way (see page
        116).
        Guangzhou, like Hong Kong, is primarily
        Cantonese-speaking, but many people also speak Mandarin. English is
        spoken in hotels and tourist destinations.
        If you travel by train, you will arrive at the Guangzhou
        East Station, a large modern complex, which connects with the subway,
        buses, hotel transfer services, and taxis. The train station is in the
        newer business district; nearby is Asia’s third-tallest building, at 83
        stories, which will often be pointed out to you.
        Sights in Guangzhou
        Yuexiu Park, situated near the Trade Fair in the northern
        part of the city, is Guangzhou’s largest; it covers a hilly 100
        hectares (247 acres). The park is landscaped with lakes and gardens. In
        the park is the 1380 Zhenhai Tower, one of the city’s oldest buildings.
        Actually a five-story pavilion on a hilltop, it contains a fine
        collection of historical exhibits. Dr. Sun Yat-sen’s Memorial Hall
        honors the founder of the Chinese Revolution, flanked by his heroic
        statue in copper. Dr. Sun Yat-sen (1866–1925) began his political
        career in Canton. This enormous, modern version of a traditional
        Chinese building, with sweeping blue tile roofs, contains an auditorium
        big enough to seat 4,700 people. It was built in 1931 with
        contributions from overseas Chinese. The center of the park is the Five
        Rams Statue. It celebrates the founding of Guangzhou, when five spirits
        rode their goats down from the celestial realm to present the
        inhabitants of the city with their very first grains of rice.
        Guangzhou’s most important Buddhist monument is the
        1,400-year-old Temple of the Six Banyan Trees (open 8am–5pm). Although
        the banyan trees that once flourished here are now no more, the
        often-restored complex has remained a focus of local Buddhist
        activities. Golden Buddha statues in several of Buddha’s aspects adorn
        the temples, and overlooking them is the 17-story Flower Pagoda, a
        slender relic of the Song dynasty (a.d. 960–1279).
        In the early Middle Ages, Canton had a significant Muslim
        population as a result of its trade with the Middle East. This explains
        the presence in Guangzhou of the Huaisheng Mosque, reputed to be
        China’s oldest, and traditionally dated a.d. 627. Rebuilt in modern
        times, the mosque serves the small local community of Muslims. The
        modern minaret is known as the “Plain (or Naked) Pagoda,” in contrast
        to the Flower Pagoda of the Buddhist temple.
        Chen Jia Ci, the Chen Family Institute (open daily
        8:30am–5pm), was built in the late 19th century to promote arts and
        crafts. An architectural wonder, it is itself a beautiful piece of
        craftsmanship with its sculpture and carved stone balustrades.
        Porcelain friezes adorn the rooftops and ridgepoles, telling the story
        of the Romance of the Three Kingdoms. Inside is a collection of
        ceramics, carvings, and furniture. There is also a market and a
        porcelain shop.
        A former Confucian temple is presently the home of the
        historic National Peasant Movement Institute, where the Chinese
        Communist Party trained its leaders in the 1920s. Mao Zedong himself
        directed the institute in 1926, and gave lectures on geography, rural
        education, and “The Problem of the Chinese Peasantry. ” Zhou Enlai also
        taught here.
        The atmosphere of 19th-century Canton is best evoked on
        Shamian Island, a haunting, nostalgic place in the Pearl River. This
        small formerly residential island, beautifully shaded by banyan trees,
        was the home of the closed community of the foreign colony in the era
        of “concessions. ” The bridges were barred by night with iron gates to
        keep the Chinese out. Its stately European-style buildings have since
        been restored, largely for use as government offices and foreign
        legations. The island also has Guangzhou’s first modern luxury resort
        hotel.
        A popular optional excursion is an hour’s detour to
        Guangzhou Zoo, founded in 1958. It houses more than 200 animal species,
        most famous of which is the giant panda, and has an imaginative monkey
        mountain behind a moat.
        Not to be missed is a visit to Guangzhou’s famous open-air
        market, Qing Ping. Guangzhou is famous for its food. The Cantonese love
        to eat and have the reputation of eating almost anything that walks on
        four legs. The market bears this out: Along with the usual ducks and
        chickens, you will see for sale snakes, dogs, bats, and sometimes
        monkeys — all are highly prized as delicacies. More pleasantly, you can
        browse among lanes of antiques, flowers, herbs, fruit, goldfish,
        songbirds, and more.
        A Side Trip to Foshan
        A very popular day-trip from Guangzhou goes to Foshan, a
        city of nearly 300,000 people, renowned for its handicrafts for more
        than a thousand years. The individual artisans’ shops are no longer
        here, but you can visit a silk-weaving factory, a ceramics plant, and
        the Foshan Folk Art Studio, where you can observe workers making
        Chinese lanterns, carving sculptures, painting scrolls, and cutting
        intricate designs in paper. The Foshan Art Porcelain Factory has
        traditional designs, but also some attractive modern pieces.
        Foshan’s most outstanding artistic monument is Zu Miao,
        the Taoist Ancestral Temple, a Sung dynasty establishment rebuilt in
        the 14th century and well worth visiting. Constructed in wood, brick,
        stone, ceramic, and bronze, this is a work of extravagant beauty,
        uniting many ancient art forms. The complex contains the oldest wooden
        stage in China, used by the Wan Fu Tai Chinese opera.
        An Excursion to Shenzhen
        Shenzhen was China’s first Special Economic Zone.
        Literally created out of rural farmland, it was set up in the 1970s as
        the answer to Hong Kong. From a population of 20,000 it has grown into
        a metropolis of 2.5 million, with tightly clustered skyscrapers and
        some of China’s highest grossing industries.
        Because Shenzhen is much cheaper than Hong Kong, it is a
        popular weekend destination for Hong Kong’s Chinese, who come to relax,
        dine in its resorts, and play golf — Shenzhen hosted the World Cup of
        Golf in 1995. It is even becoming something of a commuter town — owning
        or renting an apartment here costs a fraction of what it would in Hong
        Kong.
        Shenzhen is easy to reach — the KCR commuter train runs
        throughout the day, the trip taking about 40 minutes. Visitors need a
        visa to enter China, and must disembark at the border (now called
        “boundary”) checkpoint, Lo Wai. City buses also go to Shenzhen. A Turbo
        Cat ferry makes a one-hour trip (7am–7pm) from Hong Kong’s Macau Ferry
        Terminal to Shekou on the Natau Peninsula, which is part of the
        economic zone.
        Shenzhen is a premier shopping center, and much cheaper
        than Hong Kong. It is known for its inexpensive (but well-made)
        knock-off designer goods. You can use your Hong Kong dollars here, so
        there’s no need to change currency. Some places take credit cards, but
        cash is better for bargaining. Just across the border is the huge Lo Wu
        City shopping mall, to which you can walk; other shopping malls are
        nearby.
        Shenzhen’s main tourist attractions are its enormous theme
        parks. One of them — Splendid China — purports to show “all of China in
        one day. ” It contains elaborate replicas of China’s chief monuments in
        impressive detail, including a scaled-down version of the Great Wall.
        The 24 China Folk Culture Villages represent China’s ethnic variety;
        they feature craftspeople in traditional costumes along with folksong
        and dance performances.
        In Shekou is a large Free Market, and an exhibition of
        Xian’s terra-cotta warriors.
