
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
1.E.9.
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.F.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
about below, a noiseless owl flitted by, and I shivered with the
about building, and social arrangements, and so forth. But while
'About eight or nine in the morning I came to the same seat of
about like nine-pins. But I made a sudden motion to warn them when I
above ground you must have the Haves, pursuing pleasure and comfort
'Abruptly, I dashed down the match, and, knocking one of the people
abruptly to trouble about the Morlocks, and was only concerned in
absence, and I suggested time travelling, in a half-jocular spirit.
absolutely certain there was no trickery. There was a breath of
absolutely distinct; but this phantasm vanished as I rubbed my eyes.
absolute safety. The rich had been assured of his wealth and
abstract terms, or little use of figurative language. Their
abundant verification of my opinion.
accelerate his drift along the Time-Dimension, or even turn about
accepted account of the Battle of Hastings, for instance!'
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
accordingly. But the odour of camphor was unmistakable. In the
account. But my mind was too confused to attend to it, so with a
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
a creature much smaller and lighter than myself, I was speedily
across the darkling sky. The band of light that had indicated the
across the lower end were thick with dust. And it caught my eye that
across the spread of the waxen petals. They grew scattered, as if
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
actual loss. But that morning it left me absolutely lonely
addressed me. It came into my head, oddly enough, that my voice was
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
admired his earnestness over this new paradox (as we thought it)
a dull heat, and now and then suffering a momentary extinction. At
A flow of disappointment rushed across my mind. For a moment I felt
a foolish impulse, but the devil begotten of fear and blind anger
afraid? And close on the heels of that came a strange thing. The
afraid to turn. Then the thought of the absolute security in which
'After all, the sanitation and the agriculture of to-day are still
After an interval the Psychologist had an inspiration. 'It must have
'After a time, too, I came to connect these wells with tall towers
after a while she desired me to let her down, and ran along by the
after gallery, dusty, silent, often ruinous, the exhibits sometimes
afternoon, and that I had still no weapon, no refuge, and no means
'After the fatigues, excitements, and terrors of the past days, and
after To-morrow reports,' the Journalist was saying--or rather
Afterwards he got more animated. In writing it down I feel with only
a further remark, which puzzled me still more: that aged and infirm
again, day again, faster and faster still. An eddying murmur filled
again I was amazed to find where I had arrived. One dial records
against a block of granite, staggered aside, and in a moment was
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
against my shoulder. So we went down a long slope into a valley, and
against the horrible creatures we feared. And so, in that derelict
against their blackness, I saw three crouching figures. There was
against the pale yellow of the sky.
again--terribly alone. I began to think of this house of mine, of
'Again, the exclusive tendency of richer people--due, no doubt, to
age, and now my passion of anxiety to get out of it. I had made
age of ours, this ripe prime of the human race, when Fear does not
'Agreed,' said the Editor, and the rest of us echoed 'Agreed.' And
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
agriculture and horticulture destroy a weed just here and there and
agriculture; the whole earth had become a garden.
'A horror of this great darkness came on me. The cold, that smote
air of expectation about that evening stillness. The sky was clear,
air set down the shafts. Further, I threw a scrap of paper into the
alert. It appears incredible to me that any kind of trick, however
a little department of the field of human disease, but even so,
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
all defences against the Morlocks--I had matches! I had the camphor
Allen's came into my head, and amused me. If each generation die and
all failed to understand my gestures; some were simply stolid, some
all, it was a beautiful and curious world.
all that I beheld in that future age. This whole space was as bright
all the traditions, the complex organizations, the nations,
All were clad in the same soft and yet strong, silky material.
almost all those who had surrounded me at first were gone. It is
almost moved to begin a massacre of the helpless abominations about
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
aloft, 'I intend to explore time. Is that plain? I was never more
along the damaged rail. 'It's all right now,' he said. 'The story I
along the ground like smoke. In a moment I was wet to the skin.
already in revolution; my guesses and impressions were slipping and
'Already I saw other vast shapes--huge buildings with intricate
aluminium, a vast labyrinth of precipitous walls and crumpled
a lump of camphor from my pocket, and prepared to light it as soon
Amateur Cadger? I don't follow.' I met the eye of the Psychologist,
amazement. Then she gave a most piteous cry, and running to me, she
ambush, behind his lucid frankness. Had Filby shown the model and
a moment I suspected that my intellect had tricked me. Then I noted
among other things, that these little people gathered into the great
among this people there were none.
a monstrous spider's web. I was overpowered, and went down. I felt
a nail was working through the sole--they were comfortable old shoes
an altogether new and strange thing to Weena.
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
and a faint colour came into his cheeks. His glance flickered over
and a greenish incrustation blotched it here and there. I could see
and aluminium.
And amid all these scintillating points of light one bright planet
and as it split and flared up and drove back the Morlocks and the
'And at first I was so much surprised by this ancient monument of an
and a very splendid array of fossils it must have been, though the
and awful twilight sustained me while I clambered upon the saddle.
and a white man of our own times, and how wide the interval between
and beauty, and below ground the Have-nots, the Workers getting
and black before me. I hesitated at this. I could see no end to
and bowed. Then came one laughing towards me, carrying a chain of
and caressed her. Then, as the darkness grew deeper, she put her
and comfortable room. Then he spoke again, still as it were feeling
and decay.
and decay had been profoundly affected by these changes.
and despair. Then things came clear in my mind. With the plain,
and disappeared behind the door by which she had previously entered.
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
and ever fainter. To-morrow night came black, then day again, night
and exclusive in his food than he was--far less than any monkey. His
and excuse, and in the fullness of time Necessity had come home to
and flung them away.
and great, lidless, pinkish-grey eyes!--as they stared in their
and hand rests forming a kind of ladder down the shaft. Then the
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
and he nodded and went on down the corridor. I heard the door of
'And here I must admit that I learned very little of drains and
And here, yielding to an irresistible impulse, I wrote my name upon
and his fecundity.
and his watch in the other. I looked round for the Time Traveller,
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and I made it my staple. At first I was puzzled by all these strange
and in spite of her struggles, plunged boldly before me into the
and--'It's half-past seven now,' said the Medical Man. 'I suppose
and its stalked eyes gleaming at you on either side of its metallic
and its surface less even. Further away towards the dimness, it
and its vivid colouring returned upon the world once more, I scanned
and I was sitting on soft turf in front of the overset machine.
and, kicking violently, I disengaged myself from the clutches of the
And last of all, that evident confusion in the sunshine, that hasty
and limped on across smoking ashes and among black stems, that still
and living. And along the margin where the water sometimes broke was
and looked round us. 'I suppose I must apologize,' he said. 'I was
and me alone. The thing took my imagination. Very possibly I had
and men always have done so. I admit we move freely in two
and more secure--had gone steadily on to a climax. One triumph of a
'And now came a most unexpected thing. As I approached the pedestal
'And now I was to see the most weird and horrible thing, I think, of
and One A.D. For that, I should explain, was the date the little
'And on the heels of that came another thought. I looked at the
and out among the green weed and the red rocks. And in the westward
and out of the blackness shone brightly and steadily the pale
and painful under the heel; so I sat down again, took off my shoes,
and pattering like the rain, as they hurried after me.
'And perhaps the thing that struck me most was its dilapidated look.
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
and persisted, and presently I had a score of noun substantives at
and pulled down. It was indescribably horrible in the darkness to
and read my own interpretation in his face. I thought of the Time
and repeated a name. They had to chatter and explain the business
and rifles. The most were masses of rust, but many were of some
and rose to push on, and then there came a horrible realization. In
and security, power, intellectual as well as physical, would be out
and shouted again--rather discordantly. This time they were not so
and so did the passage of the sun across the sky, until they seemed
and standing up in my place, I saw his feet as he went out. He had
and startling some white animal that, in the dim light, I took for a
and style, the same clustering thickets of evergreens, the same
and telling you these strange adventures.'
and tentative, and our knowledge is very limited; because Nature,
and that imparted an unpleasant suggestion of disease. I stood
And that reminds me! In changing my jacket I found...'
and the atmosphere of every day is too much for my memory. Did I
And the door opened wider, and the Time Traveller stood before us.
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
And the intelligence that would have made this state of things a
and their numbers had rather diminished than kept stationary.
and the man-servant appeared.
and then be told I'm a quack.'
And then it came into my head that I would amaze our friends behind
'And then, looking more nearly into their features, I saw some
and the specialization of the sexes with reference to their
and tools; so that in the end, perhaps, I may make another." That
and travel the other way?'
and turned to a machine from which projected a lever not unlike
and under some blossom-covered apple-trees towards me. I turned
And up the hill I thought I could see ghosts. There several times,
And very soon she was smiling and clapping her hands, while I
and was hid, only in space. But then, where could it be?
and with his hands deep in his trousers pockets, he walked slowly
'And yet, not exactly! The thing had started from the south-east
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
'And you cannot move at all in Time, you cannot get away from the
an eclipse was beginning. Either the moon or the planet Mercury was
an experience. When I had started with the Time Machine, I had
animals, desiccated mummies in jars that had once held spirit, a
an incident very vividly I go back to the instant of its occurrence:
another arm of the burning forest, with yellow tongues already
another thousands of millions. Now, instead of reversing the levers,
answered. Not a creature seemed to be stirring in that moonlit
anticipated, and besides Weena was tired. And I began to suffer from
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
a peculiar shrinking from those pallid bodies. They were just the
a persuasion that if I could enter those doors and carry a blaze of
aperture of a narrow horizontal tunnel in which I could lie down and
appalling effect. I moved on a hundred years, and there was the same
apparently, just been blown in.
appeared to be broken by a number of small narrow footprints. My
appetite, and its vast ungainly claws, smeared with an algal slime,
appliances of any kind. Yet these people were clothed in pleasant
appreciate how far it fell short of the reality.
appreciation of the gift. We were soon seated together in a little
apprehend or believe? Then, think how narrow the gap between a negro
approach us with offers to donate.
appropriate enough. That was the beginning of a queer friendship
a pretty little structure, like a well under a cupola. I thought in
'A queer thing I soon discovered about my little hosts, and that was
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
a real traveller amid such realities as I found here. Conceive the
are curious. For instance, here is a portrait of a man at eight
are, for the strong would be fretted by an energy for which there
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
are too clever to be believed: you never felt that you saw all round
arise therein, the fierce jealousy, the tenderness for offspring,
aristocracy, armed with a perfected science and working to a logical
arms, and how I hesitated between my crowbar and a hatchet or a
arms round my neck, and, closing her eyes, tightly pressed her face
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
as by intense suffering. For a moment he hesitated in the doorway,
as day with the reflection of the fire. In the centre was a hillock
a series of interrogative sounds and gestures. I had some
as everybody knows now, he has never returned.
ashamed of myself. But, as you know, I wanted the Time Machine, and
'As I drove on, a peculiar change crept over the appearance of
as if he had been dazzled by the light. Then he came into the room.
as I scanned the slope, I saw white figures. Twice I fancied I saw
'As I stared at this sinister apparition crawling towards me, I felt
As I stood agape, I saw a little red spark go drifting across a gap
'As I stood there in the gathering dark I thought that in this
'As I stood there musing over this too perfect triumph of man, the
As I took hold of the handle of the door I heard an exclamation,
(as it proved) my chances of finding the Time Machine, all together
as I travelled at a high velocity through time, this scarcely
'As I walked I was watching for every impression that could possibly
askew; a thing of brass, ebony, ivory, and translucent glimmering
asks me in this note to lead off with dinner at seven if he's not
as my tail-coat permitted), and in part original. For I am naturally
a social paradise. The difficulty of increasing population had been
a solitary white, ape-like creature running rather quickly up the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
associate it with the sanitary apparatus of these people. It was an
assured it's this business of the Time Machine,' I said, and took up
assured: unless some other age had produced its exact duplicate,
As the darkness thickened, the eddying flakes grew more abundant,
as the driver determines.'
'As the eastern sky grew brighter, and the light of the day came on
'As the evening drew on, my interest waned. I went through gallery
'As the hush of evening crept over the world and we proceeded over
as the match should wane. Then I looked at Weena. She was lying
'As they made no effort to communicate with me, but simply stood
astonishment, like children, but like children they would soon stop
astonishment, towards a vast grey edifice of fretted stone. As I
a stop involved the jamming of myself, molecule by molecule, into
'A sudden thought came into my head as I stooped towards the portal.
a sun-scorched beach. Putting things together, I reached a strong
a tendency to utilize underground space for the less ornamental
'At first, proceeding from the problems of our own age, it seemed
at first. The alternations of night and day grew slower and slower,
At first things were very confusing. Everything was so entirely
at great length to each other, and my first attempts to make the
a thick incrustation of salt--pink under the lurid sky. There was a
a three-dimensional solid, and similarly they think that by models
a thud--thud--thud, like the beating of some big engine; and I
a tickling on my cheek as though a fly had lighted there. I tried to
at its meaning. In the end you will find clues to it all." Then
'At last I sat down on the summit of the hillock, and watched this
at least in my present circumstances, these would be vastly more
at my side!
at once. But the jest was unsatisfying, and I was thinking of these
'At once, like a lash across the face, came the possibility of
a transitory way of the oddness of wells still existing, and then
attention to his dinner, and displayed the appetite of a tramp.
attentively enough; but you cannot see the speaker's white,
at that, and turned again to the dark trees before me. It was very
'At that I stopped short before them, hesitating to enter.
At that I understood. At the risk of disappointing Richardson I
at the foot of that shaft? I sat upon the edge of the well telling
at the same time feel for the studs over which these fitted. One,
at the time.
automatic civilization and a decadent humanity did not long endure.
a very great comfort. I thought it was mere childish affection that
a very strange experience--the first intimation of a still stranger
avoid the stems. Overhead it was simply black, except where a gap of
away. Further in the gallery was the huge skeleton barrel of a
away. Weena I had resolved to bring with me to our own time. And
a weather record. This line I trace with my finger shows the
awful fate to which it seemed destined. As I thought of that, I was
a wheel spinning, or a bullet flying through the air. If it is
a whirling mass of black and brass for a moment--a figure so
a white or silvery figure in the waste garden of the earth, here and
a writer of stories!' he said, putting his hand on the Time
back and shoulders. They wanted to make sure I was real. There was
back at me. I will confess I was horribly frightened. I determined
back presently, I could see, through the crowded stems, that from my
back. Says he'll explain when he comes.'
back to a tree, swinging the iron bar before me. The whole wood was
back to his tribe! What would he know of railway companies, of
back to us began to fill his pipe.
back were presently acutely painful, I went on clambering down the
balanced organization? How was it related to the indolent serenity
band; and I could see nothing of the stars, save now and then a
banishing these signs of the human inheritance from Weena's eyes.
Banstead, a vast green structure, different in character from any
bars of purple and crimson. Below was the valley of the Thames, in
basis.'
beautiful flowers altogether new to me, and put it about my neck.
beautiful kind of consumptive--that hectic beauty of which we used
be better organized, and still better. That is the drift of the
be calm and patient, find its hiding-place, and recover it by force
because ancient and departed necessities had impressed it on the
'Because I presume that it has not moved in space, and if it
because I should have been glad to trace the patent readjustments by
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
becomes an evil rather than a blessing to the State; where
been a gallery of technical chemistry. And here I had not a little
been feeling desolate. At any rate I did my best to display my
been filed or sawn out of rock crystal. The thing was generally
been. It had committed suicide. It had set itself steadfastly
been restless, dreaming most disagreeably that I was drowned, and
been stunned for a moment. A pitiless hail was hissing round me,
been travelling into the middle of next week! Tell us all about
been very queer to them. Some laughed, most of them looked sorely
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
before each, and only a narrow line of daylight at the top. I went
before he had finished his preface the Time Traveller came back, and
before my eyes! I saw great and splendid architecture rising about
before the light. Living, as they did, in what appeared to me
before the old moon rose were still to come.
began the conversation. I pointed to the Time Machine and to myself.
began the last great peace. This has ever been the fate of energy in
began to pull at me with her little hands. I think her opposition
be incontinently slain.
beings about me. I felt the box of matches in my hand being gently
being, which is a fixed and unalterable thing.
be in the absence of man and in a temperate climate. The sun's
Belemnite that must have perished and become fossilized millions
belief in a perfect conquest of Nature. For after the battle comes
bell in passing, he led the way into the adjoining room.
bells and modes of conveyance, and the like conveniences, during my
belonged to another universe, shone the little stars. Two or three
belt swayed up and down, from solstice to solstice, in a minute or
bench beside some sheets of drawings, and I took one up for a better
beneath my feet: could, indeed, almost see through it the Morlocks
'Beneath my feet, then, the earth must be tunnelled enormously, and
be out of sight of the stars. Even were there no other lurking
beside it in the thick dust, and in one place, where rain-water had
beside me, her face white and starlike under the stars, and
best against the bronze gates. There were numbers of guns, pistols,
be the exact inversion of her previous ones. The door at the lower
between them and the rude violence of the poor--is already leading
'Between the tables was scattered a great number of cushions.
beyond the range of my explorings. This, again, was a question I
big machines, all greatly corroded and many broken down, but some
black, and Weena clung to me convulsively, but there was still, as
blackness I could hear the Morlocks rustling like wind among leaves,
blackness that was creeping over the day, and then I realized that
blackness. Then suddenly came hope. What if the Morlocks were
black, the ground a sombre grey, the sky colourless and cheerless.
black wing. The dim suggestion of the laboratory seemed presently to
blindness and bewilderment. But I did not stay to look, I promise
blindness, and struck furiously at them with my bar, in a frenzy of
block of sulphur set my mind running on gunpowder. But I could find
blood-red water, and it was hopping fitfully about. Then I felt I
blossom-laden trees and tree-ferns. Here and there water shone like
boldly, whispering odd sounds to each other. I shivered violently,
bole, and very hastily, as my first lump of camphor waned, I began
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
brass candlesticks upon the mantel and several in sconces, so that
Breadth, and Thickness, and is always definable by reference to
breathe. I lit the block of camphor and flung it to the ground,
brighter circle flickering in the blue.
bright eyes which regarded me steadfastly as it retreated. It made
brilliant butterflies flew hither and thither. The ideal of
Brontosaurus. My museum hypothesis was confirmed. Going towards the
bronze, and was thick with verdigris. It chanced that the face was
bronze frame and up to the Time Machine. I was surprised to find it
bronze panels, and if they don't, you will get it back as soon as
bronze panels suddenly slid up and struck the frame with a clang.
bronze under the White Sphinx. I had in mind a battering ram. I had
brown dust of departed plants: that was all! I was sorry for that,
brown. The roof was in shadow, and the windows, partially glazed
brows, he lapsed into an introspective state, his lips moving as one
brush it away with my hand, but in a moment it returned, and almost
brutes of the Jurassic times. He may even now--if I may use the
building I had left was situated on the slope of a broad river
buildings, but the house and the cottage, which form such
building which my fancy had chosen as our dwelling.
burned down, and stung my fingers, and fell, a wriggling red spot
burning wood. I was caught by the neck, by the hair, by the arms,
bushes, and I noticed that their mauve and purple blossoms were
bushes, black in the pale light, and there was the little lawn.
bushes towards the hill again. "Patience," said I to myself. "If you
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
But, as it was, I stood there with only the weapons and the powers
But as it was, the thing that struck me with keenest force was the
'But as I walked over the smoking ashes under the bright morning
'But at last the lever was fitted and pulled over. The clinging
'But before the balloons, save for spasmodic jumping and the
but cheerlessly of the Advancement of Mankind, and saw in the
but for the most part they were strange.
but I felt restless and uncomfortable. It was that dim grey hour
'But I have experimental verification,' said the Time Traveller.
but I never felt quite safe at my back.
'But,' I said, 'If it travelled into the past it would have been
'But is it not some hoax?' I said. 'Do you really travel through
but it speedily reverted to its sullen red heat. I perceived by this
'But it _was_ the lawn. For the white leprous face of the sphinx was
'But I was not beaten yet. I banged with my fist at the bronze
But my story slips away from me as I speak of her. It must have been
but possibly the panels, if they were doors, as I supposed, opened
'But probably, the machine had only been taken away. Still, I must
'But,' said the Medical Man, staring hard at a coal in the fire, 'if
But that perfect state had lacked one thing even for mechanical
'But the great difficulty is this,' interrupted the Psychologist.
but there was an altogether new element in the sickening quality of
'But the thing's a mere paradox,' said the Editor.
but to wait inactive for twenty-four hours--that is another matter.
But Weena was a pleasant substitute. Yet all the same, they were
But when I had watched the gestures of one of them groping under the
'But with this change in condition comes inevitably adaptations to
'But with this recovery of a prompt retreat my courage recovered. I
By contrast with the brilliancy outside, it seemed at first
by lighting it. I was to discover the atrocious folly of this
by some unknown forces which I had only to understand to overcome;
by the light and heat, and blundering hither and thither against
by the oblique feet that it was some extinct creature after the
calamity, that should indeed have served me as a warning, drove me
calm and patient, to learn the way of the people, to get a clear
came a doubt. I hesitated. Then, selecting a little side gallery,
came eddying down. To the north-eastward, the glare of snow lay
came out. The ground grew dim and the trees black. Weena's fears and
camera under one arm and a knapsack under the other. He laughed when
came the white light of the day.
came to a gallery of simply colossal proportions, but singularly
came to look at these indicators I found that the thousands hand was
came to-morrow. The laboratory grew faint and hazy, then fainter
came upon one of those round well-like openings of which I have told
camphor. Then I turned to where Weena lay beside my iron mace. I
'Can a cube that does not last for any time at all, have a real
candles in the smoking-room had not been lighted, and only the face
cannot describe how it relieved me to think that it had escaped the
can we appreciate this machine, any more than we can the spoke of
cared for me, the little doll of a creature presently gave my return
caressed us rather than submitted to be sat upon, and there was that
carpet. I took my eyes off the Time Traveller's face, and looked
carriage of the head while in the light--all reinforced the theory
carried forward. And the harvest was what I saw!
cartridges! I shouted "Eureka!" and smashed the case with joy. Then
cases had in some instances been bodily removed--by the Morlocks as
cast herself into it had I not restrained her. But I caught her up,
cattle, they knew of no enemies and provided against no needs. And
caught napping by the Morlocks, and, stretching myself, I came on
caught the poor mite and drew her safe to land. A little rubbing of
ceiling--many of them cracked and smashed--which suggested that
certain indefinable apprehension still kept me in the saddle of the
certainly be infinitely ahead of ourselves in all their appliances.
'Certainly,' said the Time Traveller, stooping to light a spill at
chanced upon. Nevertheless I left that gallery greatly elated.
changed! Already the Eloi had begun to learn one old lesson anew.
channelled along the more frequented ways. Transverse to the length
characteristic features of our own English landscape, had
character, than the Upper. And when other meat failed them, they
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
charred and shattered; perhaps, I thought, by an explosion among the
cheerfulness. 'Really this is what is meant by the Fourth Dimension,
Chief Executive and Director
children's needs disappears. We see some beginnings of this even
chill of the night. I determined to descend and find where I could
chuckled gleefully.
circle of a few miles round the point of my arrival.
circular wells, several, as it seemed to me, of a very great depth.
civilization that was at last attained must have long since passed
Clambering among these heaps of masonry, I found a narrow gallery,
clasps that told the tale well enough. Had I been a literary man I
clear as daylight to me that the gradual widening of the present
'Clearly we stood among the ruins of some latter-day South
clever man seemed tricks in his hands. It is a mistake to do things
climbers as the Morlocks, to judge by their wells, must be. Then the
close upon me. One touched me. I made a sweeping blow in the dark at
clutching my feet and quite motionless, with her face to the ground.
coat. The Medical Man looked into his face and, with a certain
cold.' He took up the lamp, and, in an absolute silence, we
collapsed, this gallery was well preserved. I went eagerly to every
collecting sticks and leaves. Here and there out of the darkness
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
color like that of early twilight; the jerking sun became a streak
colourless and clear cut, and yet unreal. I got up, and went down
colour swam before them. The Medical Man seemed absorbed in the
come down and explain things ... Save me some of that mutton. I'm
comfort of the daylight race was done? The notion was so plausible
comfort, the toiler assured of his life and work. No doubt in that
coming home; and I would watch for her tiny figure of white and gold
coming times which I have read, there is a vast amount of detail
common features of nocturnal things--witness the owl and the cat.
communication.
'"Communism," said I to myself.
complete, but the twisted crystalline bars lay unfinished upon the
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
concern and to abstain from any pursuit of them, and in the course
conclusion the industrial system of to-day. Its triumph had not been
conditions of life--the true civilizing process that makes life more
conditions under which it lived--the flourish of that triumph which
conditions under which the active, strong, and subtle survive and
confusion in my ears was gone. I looked round me. I was on what
connubial jealousy, against fierce maternity, against passion
considerable difficulty in conveying my meaning. At first my efforts
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
contact with those of the obstacle that a profound chemical
contained in one's imagination, they are altogether inaccessible to
contemplation of our host. The Editor was looking hard at the end
continually adapted to the conditions of their labour. Once they
continued the Time Traveller, with a slight accession of
contrive to keep my path illuminated through the woods. Yet it was
convenient thing to begin upon, and holding one of these up I began
conversational beginnings ended, I noted for the first time that
convey or understand any but the simplest propositions. I determined
copied or distributed:
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
corner of the laboratory. It had come to rest again in the
corroded in places with a kind of pinkish rust and half smothered
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
could invent. It is how the thing shaped itself to me, and as that I
could not imagine the Morlocks were strong enough to move it far
could not refrain from laughing bitterly at my confidence. Here
Could this Thing have vanished down the shaft? I lit a match, and,
course we have no means of staying back for any length of Time, any
crab-like creature. Can you imagine a crab as large as yonder table,
crabs had disappeared, and the red beach, save for its livid green
cramped and fatigued by the descent. And not simply fatigued! One of
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
creature's friendliness affected me exactly as a child's might have
crematoria nor anything suggestive of tombs. But it occurred to me
crest of hillocks pinkish white. There were fringes of ice along the
Cretaceous Sea; or among the grotesque saurians, the huge reptilian
cried the Medical Man, who saw him next. And the whole tableful
crossing? or has he his Nebuchadnezzar phases?' he inquired. 'I feel
crystalline substance. And now I must be explicit, for this that
cube exist?'
cultivate perhaps a score or so of wholesome plants, leaving the
cupolas above the ways to the Under-world. I understood now what all
curiosity. 'Does our friend eke out his modest income with a
current in spite of the eddies. The whole world will be intelligent,
current ran rather swiftly, but not too strongly for even a moderate
curved line of fire was creeping up the grass of the hill. I laughed
cut on it--a cut half healed; his expression was haggard and drawn,
DAMAGE.
dancing before my eyes; and the cold of the air more intense. At
danger--a danger I did not care to let my imagination loose
dangers? There is a sentiment arising, and it will grow, against
dark, and it was only with my last glimpse of light I discovered
dark body. They moved hastily. I did not see what became of them.
dark. Mrs. Watchett came in and walked, apparently without seeing
darkness about my knees, perfectly silent on her part and with the
darkness and light was excessively painful to the eye. Then, in the
darkness seemed to grow luminous. Very dimly I began to see the
dark, silent, and deserted. I slipped on the uneven floor, and fell
dark--the white fish of the Kentucky caves, for instance. Then,
day, as pleasant as the day of the cattle in the field. Like the
day it almost seemed to me that my fear had been unreasonable. I
daylight in the shadow. The male pursued the female, flinging
days, and another thousands of days, another millions of days, and
days ... such days as no human being ever lived before! I'm nearly
Dead Sea, the stony beach crawling with these foul, slow-stirring
decay the Morlocks' food had run short. Possibly they had lived on
decided that I would not face it, but would pass the night upon the
decision. And the institution of the family, and the emotions that
defeated upon the point. The thing puzzled me, and I was led to make
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
deficiency in these creatures, when I tell you that none made the
degeneration, to a general dwindling in size, strength, and
deliberately put to myself, and my curiosity was at first entirely
delicately made. There was ivory in it, and some transparent
delight, I solemnly performed a kind of composite dance, whistling
deliquesced ages ago. Yet the sulphur hung in my mind, and set up a
Delivery Company, and postal orders and the like? Yet we, at least,
denser or thinner. At last I tore my eyes from it for a moment and
descent was effected by means of metallic bars projecting from
described.
desolate beach grew visible.
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
determined, rather of necessity, to let them give their lessons in
determined to make the Morlocks pay for their meat. I stood with my
determine. It was here that I was destined, at a later date, to have
developed into something inhuman, unsympathetic, and overwhelmingly
dewdrops, as is sometimes the case in more tropical districts.
dials of my machine recorded.
difference in aspect suggested a difference in use, and I was minded
different from that of the Over-world people; so that I was needs
different from the world I had known--even the flowers. The big
difficulty in keeping my hold. The last few yards was a frightful
dimensions. But how about up and down? Gravitation limits us there.'
dimensions. I was naturally most occupied with the growing crowd of
Dimensions. Long ago I had a vague inkling of a machine--'
dimensions of Space generally recognized? But certainly it traced
diminished. In addition, the heel of one of my shoes was loose, and
dining-halls and sleeping apartments. I could find no machinery, no
dinner-table.
dinner was resumed. Conversation was exclamatory for a little while,
direction. I looked into the thickness of the wood and thought of
disappeared.
disappointed. At first she would not understand my questions, and
discontinuous with the frames. There were no handles or keyholes,
discovered, from the flaring of my matches, that a steady current of
discovery--but of that I will speak in its proper place.
discussed among us long before the Time Machine was made--thought
disease to require strength of constitution, no need of toil. For
disengaged, and other hands behind me plucking at my clothing. The
disinclination to leave Weena, and a persuasion that if I began to
disjointed. Mother Necessity, who had been staved off for a
dismay.
dismay, staggered a little way, and fell down. I lit another piece
distance, and the slow inevitable drift of their movements out of
distinct, and then I caught the same queer sound and voices I had
distinct animals: that my graceful children of the Upper-world were
distinct as the light of the rising moon grew brighter. I could see
distinct, shining with the wet of the thunderstorm, and picked out
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
distrusted him. Things that would have made the frame of a less
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
done. We passed each other flowers, and she kissed my hands. I did
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
'Don't follow you,' said Filby.
don't know how to convey their expression to you. Suppose you were
'Don't you think you would attract attention?' said the Medical Man.
door closed upon him. I had half a mind to follow, till I remembered
door on you. You know the rest. I washed, and dined, and now I am
doors. As yet my iron crowbar was the most helpful thing I had
doors under the sphinx as much as possible in a corner of memory,
down a very ruinous aisle running parallel to the first hall I had
down into grooves.
downpour. But all else of the world was invisible.
down the hill towards the White Sphinx. I had my crowbar in one
down towards, or had already arrived at, an altogether new
downward were illuminated. At first we glanced now and again at each
drag was done. The earth had come to rest with one face to the sun,
dreaded the dark, dreaded shadows, dreaded black things. Darkness
dreadful and disgusting for our common likeness--a foul creature to
dread--until at last they took complete possession of me. What
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
dropped, and when I had lit another the little monster had
dropped through a leak in the roof, the thing itself had been worn
dropping in a shower under the beating of the hail-stones. The
dull white, and had strange large greyish-red eyes; also that there
dusk? Even the breeze stops in the trees. To me there is always an
each other in their bewilderment. At first I did not realize their
ears, shook it again. He came a step forward, hesitated, and then
'Easier, far easier down than up.'
easily fatigued.
eat. I won't say a word until I get some peptone into my arteries.
eddying mass of bright, soft-colored robes and shining white limbs,
edition of the little mechanism which we had seen vanish from before
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
Editor aforementioned, a certain journalist, and another--a quiet,
educated, and co-operating; things will move faster and faster
educational process and the increased facilities for and temptations
effort in which we are at present engaged. And yet, come to think,
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
eight miles, but it must have been nearer eighteen. I had first seen
eight or ten of these exquisite creatures were about me. One of them
either hand, but nothing came of it. I saw a crowd of them upon the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
electronic works
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
else was rayless obscurity. The sky was absolutely black.
emotion, and it set me thinking and observing. I discovered then,
empty space among the black tangle of bushes. I ran round it
end at which I entered. At intervals white globes hung from the
End of Project Gutenberg's The Time Machine, by H. G. (Herbert George) Wells
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TIME MACHINE ***
end opened, and she glided quietly up the laboratory, back foremost,
engaged in no toil. There were no signs of struggle, neither social
enormous waste of labour to which this sombre wilderness of rotting
enough.
enough, and helps the paradox delightfully. We cannot see it, nor
entered. Apparently this section had been devoted to natural
entered, I, dressed in dingy nineteenth-century garments, looking
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
EPILOGUE
estimate of her kind that I did not expect any gratitude from her.
even as in our own time the moon faces the earth. Very cautiously,
Even in our own time certain tendencies and desires, once necessary
even the verb "to eat." But it was slow work, and the little people
'Even this artistic impetus would at last die away--had almost died
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
ever crawled dashed by too fast for me. The twinkling succession of
ever make a Time Machine, or a model of a Time Machine? Or is it all
Everyone was silent for a minute. Then Filby said he was damned.
Everything save that little disk above was profoundly dark, and when
Everything still seemed grey, but presently I remarked that the
evident that if I was to flourish matches with my hands I should
exact distance from my little lawn to the pedestal of the White
exactly like that one has upon a switchback--of a helpless headlong
examining me and wander away after some other toy. The dinner and my
except during my night's anguish at the loss of the Time Machine,
except that our consciousness moves along it_. But some foolish
exchange between class and class, that promotion by intermarriage
exhausted and calling after me rather plaintively. But the problems
existence?'
'Experimental verification!' cried I. 'You are going to verify
explained the matter in the Time Traveller's words, we should have
explanation, and plausible enough--as most wrong theories are!
explanation may be absolutely wrong. I still think it is the
explorations here and there. Either I missed some subtle point or
exploration was even then in my mind. But I said to myself, "You are
Exploring, I found another short gallery running transversely to the
explosives, however, nor any means of breaking down the bronze
explosive thud as each fresh tree burst into flame, left little
exquisite little sounds of their language caused an immense amount
extremely precocious, physically at least, and I found afterwards
eyes. The absence from his bearing of any sign of fear struck me at
fabrics that must at times need renewal, and their sandals, though
face, and all of a sudden I let him go.
face, and their ears were singularly minute. The mouths were small,
face. I saw the wild folly of my frenzy overnight, and I could
face this strange world with some of that confidence I had lost in
fact, an excellent candle--and I put it in my pocket. I found no
fact, except along the river valley--showed how universal were its
faintly glittering brass and ivory; and it was gone--vanished! Save
faint shadow of a smile on the lips. It was greatly weather-worn,
fair a view as I have ever seen. The sun had already gone below the
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
fall away from me, and I saw the sun hopping swiftly across the sky,
fallen away from the corroded metallic framework. It lay very high
fancied I heard the breathing of a crowd of those dreadful little
fancy, more human than she was, perhaps because her affection was so
far as possible that night, and then, building a fire, to sleep
'Far away up the desolate slope I heard a harsh scream, and saw a
fashion, in eating fruit and sleeping. I could not see how things
fashion of the Megatherium. The skull and the upper bones lay
fastness where I might sleep. With that refuge as a base, I could
fast to be conscious of any moving things. The slowest snail that
fate of the Time Machine! And very vaguely there came a suggestion
fatted cattle, which the ant-like Morlocks preserved and preyed
favourite plants and animals--and how few they are--gradually by
fear, and in spite of Weena's distress I insisted upon sleeping away
fear, as they approached me, killing one and crippling several more.
fearing the darkness before us; but a singular sense of impending
fear. I turned frantically to the Time Machine, and strove hard to
fears. In that darkling calm my senses seemed preternaturally
Fear. You know that great pause that comes upon things before the
feeble prettiness, and the Under-world to mere mechanical industry.
feeding of the Under-world, however it was effected, had become
feel all these soft creatures heaped upon me. I felt as if I was in
feeling of prolonged falling, had absolutely upset my nerve. I told
feel it grip me at the throat and stop my breathing. In another
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
feet running and stumbling this way and that. I do not remember all
fell far short of the truth.
fellow-man. This, I must warn you, was my theory at the time. I had
felt all the sensations of falling. At last, however, I got over the
felt his bones grind under the blow of my fist. He gave a whoop of
felt in my pocket for the match-box, and--it had gone! Then they
felt naked in a strange world. I felt as perhaps a bird may feel in
felt that this close resemblance of the sexes was after all what
felt very weary after my exertion, and sat down. The wood, too, was
feverish and irritable. I felt sleep coming upon me, and the
few casual places by the memory of his story. And I have by me, for
few shrivelled and blackened vestiges of what had once been stuffed
few thousand years, came back again, and she began below. The
fight by killing some of them before this should happen; but the
fighting came upon me. I knew that both I and Weena were lost, but I
figures all the morning, until Weena's rescue drove them out of my
Filby became pensive. 'Clearly,' the Time Traveller proceeded, 'any
Filby contented himself with laughter.
Filby's anecdote collapsed.
Filby tried to tell us about a conjurer he had seen at Burslem; but
"Fine hospitality," said I, "to a man who has travelled innumerable
fire burned brightly, and the soft radiance of the incandescent
fire burst out again brightly, and I stayed my hand. I walked about
fire. Upon the hill-side were some thirty or forty Morlocks, dazzled
first I scarce thought of stopping, scarce thought of anything but
first. This appeared to be devoted to minerals, and the sight of a
first time I began to realize an odd consequence of the social
first walk. Like the others, it was rimmed with bronze, curiously
flames. But, at last, above the subsiding red of the fire, above the
flat and brittle--to witness that even when mind and strength had
flickered across his face. 'What on earth have you been up to, man?'
flight.
flood of humanity. Clearly, at some time in the Long-Ago of human
flowed. The hands spun backward upon the dials. At last I saw again
flowers, a long neglected and yet weedless garden. I saw a number
flowers at her as he ran.
flung headlong through the air.
followed me for some way, and well-nigh secured my boot as a trophy.
follows--unless his explanation is to be accepted--is an absolutely
follow their example, for I felt thirsty and hungry. As I did so I
footprints like those I could imagine made by a sloth. This directed
footsteps. Weena, who had been rolling a sea urchin down the sloping
For additional contact information:
'For a moment I was staggered, though the import of his gesture was
'For a time my brain went stagnant. Presently I got up and came
force; where population is balanced and abundant, much childbearing
forest. It was my first fire coming after me. With that I looked for
for floral decoration. At least she utilized them for that purpose.
forget that the planets must ultimately fall back one by one into
forgive my leaving you now?'
forgotten, and reaching over the bars of the machine I unscrewed the
for he looked round the table, and the ghost of his old smile
for I remembered my former headlong fall, I began to reverse
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
For my own part I was unable to come to a conclusion. The story was
for nothing, I knew, would be more efficient against these Morlocks.
For once, at least, I grasped the mental operations of the Morlocks.
For, reasoning from their daylight behaviour, I thought that fear
'For some way I heard nothing but the crackling twigs under my feet,
for the climbing hooks. Rather hastily, I may as well confess, for
for the lamp the table was bare.
'For the most part of that night I was persuaded it was a nightmare.
for the most part they had the interest of puzzles, and I could make
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
forthwith dismissed the thought.
fossils broken to pieces or threaded in strings upon reeds. And the
found afterwards that horses, cattle, sheep, dogs, had followed the
Foundation
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
found, instead of the customary hall, a long gallery lit by many
found nothing that commended itself to my mind as inaccessible. All
found the world--for ruinous it was. A little way up the hill, for
four feet high--clad in a purple tunic, girdled at the waist with a
four or five men already assembled in his drawing-room. The Medical
four safety-matches that still remained to me.
fragmentary theory, and mutual discord are indeed man's culminating
frail creatures who had forgotten their high ancestry, and the white
frail that I could fancy myself flinging the whole dozen of them
framed panels on either side. I went and rapped at these. The
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
free of the trammels of precision. And he put it to us in this
freshness. I had exhausted my emotion. Indeed, as I went about
friendly comfort in their twinkling. All the old constellations
frightened. When I saw them standing round me, it came into my head
frightful qualm, I turned, and I saw that I had grasped the antenna
from an exploration, and she received me with cries of delight and
from my pocket, I made good my retreat to the narrow tunnel. But I
from the beach. I fancied I saw some black object flopping about
from the broken twigs. Then, sobbing and raving in my anguish of
'From the brow of the next hill I saw a thick wood spreading wide
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
from these slumbering multitudes.
from within. One thing was clear enough to my mind. It took no very
front? Its back was corrugated and ornamented with ungainly bosses,
'Fruit, by the by, was all their diet. These people of the remote
fruits, and by the strange flowers I saw, but later I began to
fruit with their hands, flinging peel and stalks, and so forth, into
full moon, yellow and gibbous, came up out of an overflow of silver
full of a slumbrous murmur that I did not understand. I seemed just
full of such litter. Thus loaded, our progress was slower than I had
full of the stir and cries of them. A minute passed. Their voices
fungi; everywhere were fruits and sweet and delightful flowers;
furiously, as if the thing might be hidden in a corner, and then
further and further afield in my exploring expeditions. Going to the
further end of the laboratory was empty. A pane of the skylight had,
further peculiarities in their Dresden-china type of prettiness.
future. In a circular opening, high up in the wall of the nearer
future were strict vegetarians, and while I was with them, in spite
futurity.
gallery and into another and still larger one, which at the first
gallery I heard a peculiar pattering, and the same odd noises I had
gathered any sticks or dried grass I saw, and presently had my arms
gbnewby@pglaf.org
general co-operation as I had imagined. Instead, I saw a real
generations, had come at last to find the daylit surface
gentle breathing, and showed that the eternal sea was still moving
gentleness, a certain childlike ease. And besides, they looked so
gently, in bathing in the river, in making love in a half-playful
geometry of Four Dimensions for some time. Some of my results
getting up, he went to the tobacco jar on the mantel, and with his
give it to you.
glance reminded me of a military chapel hung with tattered flags.
glare. I did so, and eking out the flicker with a scrap of paper
glass of a case, presently came, as I stared about me, and very
gleam of its walls came back to my memory; and in the evening,
glimpse of the Underworld in a second, and examined it at leisure.
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
go back to Weena, and see what I could get from her. But my mind was
'Going through the big palace, it seemed to me that the little
go. It will vanish, pass into future Time, and disappear. Have a
gone, gratitude and a mutual tenderness still lived on in the heart
gone into the past if it has gone anywhere,' he said.
gone out that way?' said I.
good look at the thing. Look at the table too, and satisfy
good night.
got the better of me. In three strides I was after him, had him by
grape, now a sweeter and larger flower, now a more convenient breed
grappled fiercely, wrist and knee, with the machine. It gave under
grass and moss upon the lower parts, and one rail bent awry.
greater freedom. The fluctuating contours of the land ebbed and
greater number to fight out a balance as they can. We improve our
great mental effort to infer that my Time Machine was inside that
greenery, some in ruins and some still occupied. Here and there rose
grew faster. Yet none came within reach. I stood glaring at the
grew thinner, I saw the white figure more distinctly. It was very
grew to frenzy. I took a breathing space, set my teeth, and again
grew up in my mind--a certain curiosity and therewith a certain
grey and dim. I saw trees growing and changing like puffs of vapour,
griffins' heads. I sat down on it, and I surveyed the broad view of
grindstone broken at last!
gripped and closed with me again. In a moment I knew what had
grotesque enough, garlanded with flowers, and surrounded by an
ground. But a civilized man is better off than the savage in this
ground for it. You will soon admit as much as I need from you. You
growing now into a gusty roar, the red glow, and the Morlocks'
growing pile of civilization only a foolish heaping that must
growing pink and warm. No Morlocks had approached us. Indeed, I had
growing slower and slower, had given place to creeping points of
guests.
gusts from the east, and the showering white flakes in the air
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
Gutenberg-tm License.
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
gutters and tunnels, from which their eyes glared at me in the
had actually faded. His face was ghastly pale; his chin had a brown
had a great deal more in it than a Gallery of Palaeontology;
had been carefully oiled and cleaned. I have suspected since that
had changed; that a concavity, a bay, had appeared in the curve. I
had devised for the increase of population had succeeded too well,
had gone from the sky, however: that slow movement which is
had had a companion it would have been different. But I was so
had just rushed out of the chamber. I tried to get to sleep again,
had leaped. The air was free from gnats, the earth from weeds or
had scarce entered this when my light was blown out and in the
had seen was human. But, gradually, the truth dawned on me: that
had taken it into the hollow pedestal of the White Sphinx. Why? For
had, through the extinction of bacteria and fungi, lost ninety-nine
had vanished. Here and there among the greenery were palace-like
had wasted almost half the box in astonishing the Upper-worlders, to
had witnessed that day week. He was in the midst of his exposition
hairless visage, and the same girlish rotundity of limb. It may seem
half-bleached colour of the worms and things one sees preserved in
half-dozen little figures that were following me. Then, in a flash,
half-truth--or only a glimpse of one facet of the truth.)
hall, and the scene was lit by the warm glow of the setting sun.
hall where the little people were sleeping in the moonlight--that
halted spellbound. A pair of eyes, luminous by reflection against
hammered till I had flattened a coil in the decorations, and the
hand, and the other hand played with the matches in my pocket.
hand.' And turning to the Psychologist, he took that individual's
hand came against my iron lever. It gave me strength. I struggled
hand for a cigar, and cut the end. 'But come into the smoking-room.
hand in his own and told him to put out his forefinger. So that it
hand on the saddle, the other on the lever, I stood panting heavily
hands, and went off with a thud. The laboratory got hazy and went
hands slipped from me. The darkness presently fell from my eyes.
happened, and for the moment could not distinguish what the strange
happened. I had slept, and my fire had gone out, and the bitterness
happened to men? What if cruelty had grown into a common passion?
happened to the Under-grounders I did not yet suspect; but from what
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
harshly, she burst into tears. They were the only tears, except my
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
has happened to me, if you like, but you must refrain from
has it always been, regarded as something different? And why cannot
has no real existence. They taught you that? Neither has a
hastily striking one, I saw three stooping white creatures similar
has travelled into time?'
have a journey on my own account.'
have never seen the like can scarcely imagine what delicate and
have no doubt they found my second appearance strange enough, coming
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
have rushed off incontinently and blown Sphinx, bronze doors, and
have to abandon my firewood; so, rather reluctantly, I put it down.
hawthorn against the red sky, and heard their moans, I was assured
head.
head. I associated them in some indefinite way with the white animal
headlines. And this brought my attention back to the bright
head was bare. Noticing that, I noticed for the first time how warm
heap of sticks the blaze had spread to some bushes adjacent, and a
heaps, amidst which were thick heaps of very beautiful pagoda-like
heard.
heard down the well.
heard in the Under-world. There were evidently several of the
heard what they have to say about this Fourth Dimension?'
heard your voices and the clatter of plates. I hesitated--I felt so
heat is rarely strong enough to burn, even when it is focused by
heavens. Then I stopped once more, for the crawling multitude of
He came into the hall with us and helped the Editor on with his
He caught up the lamp swiftly, and carried it, flaring red, through
he go forward, into one of the nearer ages, in which men are still
He lit one and spoke over his pipe, puffing. 'To tell you the truth
He looked across at the Editor, who was a rare visitor, and hoped he
He looked at the Medical Man. 'No. I cannot expect you to believe
help me to interpret this, but I only learned that the bare idea of
help to explain the condition of ruinous splendour in which I
He put down his glass, and walked towards the staircase door. Again
her; and then putting her down, I began to feel over the parapet
here.'
here is one little white lever, and here is another.'
here. Surely the mercury did not trace this line in any of the
'Here was the new view. Plainly, this second species of Man was
her fatigue grew upon her. I took her in my arms and talked to her
He said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and made a
He sat back in his chair at first, and spoke like a weary man.
he saw me, and gave me an elbow to shake. 'I'm frightfully busy,'
hesitated. His eye wandered about the room. 'I only want half an
hesitation, told him he was suffering from overwork, at which he
'He struck me as being a very beautiful and graceful creature, but
He took up his pipe, and began, in his old accustomed manner, to tap
He walked with just such a limp as I have seen in footsore tramps.
He was in an amazing plight. His coat was dusty and dirty, and
hidden in a black shadow beneath another pile of ruined masonry.
hiding-place had still to be found. But that troubled me very little
hill, and once near the ruins I saw a leash of them carrying some
hill-side, and remain there, without any wintry intermission. Even
hill-side, there, as it seemed to me, was an altogether safer
hill-side was quiet and deserted, but from the black of the wood
him, he resorted to caricature. Hadn't they any clothes-brushes in
him. I even tried a Carlyle-like scorn of this wretched aristocracy
him in profile from the right, the Psychologist from the left. The
him; you always suspected some subtle reserve, some ingenuity in
hindrances--to a civilized man. And in a state of physical balance
his cigar over the lamp; 'that ... very clear indeed.'
His eye fell with a mute inquiry upon the withered white flowers
his finger towards the lever. 'No,' he said suddenly. 'Lend me your
history, but everything had long since passed out of recognition. A
his way among his words. 'I'm going to wash and dress, and then I'll
home to me? But you cannot. The Time Machine was gone!
hooks, and, as I did so, my feet were grasped from behind, and I
hope of useful discoveries. Except at one end where the roof had
horizon and the west was flaming gold, touched with some horizontal
horribly alone, and even to clamber down into the darkness of the
hour,' he said. 'I know why you came, and it's awfully good of you.
hour. It seemed to advance and to recede as the hail drove before it
house, I saw a group of figures clad in rich soft robes. They had
houses after dark, and slept in droves. To enter upon them without a
house where I slept and fed, there happened this strange thing:
how dry was some of the foliage above me, for since my arrival
'However, I am telling you of my fruit dinner in the distant future
how he detested any fuss about himself. For a minute, perhaps, my
how nauseatingly inhuman they looked--those pale, chinless faces
'How shall we get home?'
how she would look. They went off as if they had received the last
http://gutenberg.net/license).
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
http://www.gutenberg.net
http://www.gutenberg.net/3/35/
human.
human form not to claim my sympathy, and to make me perforce a
humanity appeared to be living came to my mind. And then I
Hundred and One. It may be as wrong an explanation as mortal wit
Hundred and Two Thousand odd would be incredibly in front of us in
Hundred and Two Thousand Seven Hundred and One presented itself to
Hundred Thousand Years hence, and it was no great wonder to see four
hundredths of its force, was nevertheless, with extreme sureness if
I
'I am afraid I cannot convey the peculiar sensations of time
'I awakened Weena, and we went down into the wood, now green and
'I awoke a little before sunsetting. I now felt safe against being
I become absent-minded, as you say. I jump back for a moment. Of
I bit myself and screamed in a passionate desire to awake. I beat
'I cannot convey the sense of abominable desolation that hung over
'I cannot tell you all the story of that long afternoon. It would
I can't argue. I will,' he went on, 'tell you the story of what
'I can't argue to-night. I don't mind telling you the story, but
I caught Filby's eye over the shoulder of the Medical Man, and he
Ichthyosaurus into extinction. But the fruits were very delightful;
I consented, hardly comprehending then the full import of his words,
'I could already hear their murmuring laughter as they came towards
I could, and whiled away the time by trying to fancy I could find
I could feel them approaching me again. They clutched at me more
I could get my bearings for the White Sphinx. And so, leaving the
I could never sleep again until my bed was secure from them. I
I could see no gleam of water, nor could I start any reflection
I could solve their puzzles I should find myself in possession of
I cried to her in her own tongue. For now I had a weapon indeed
idea of the method of my loss, and the means of getting materials
ideas that are almost universally accepted. The geometry, for
'I'd give a shilling a line for a verbatim note,' said the Editor.
I did as the moon crept up the sky. I suppose it was the unexpected
'I do not know how long I lay. I was roused by a soft hand touching
'I do not know how long I sat peering down that well. It was not for
'I do not mean to ask you to accept anything without reasonable
'I don't know if you have ever thought what a rare thing flame must
'I drew a breath, set my teeth, gripped the starting lever with both
I fancied at first that it was paraffin wax, and smashed the glass
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
I feared my courage might leak away! At first she watched me in
I felt an unreasonable amazement. I knew that something strange had
I felt that I was wasting my time in the academic examination of
I found a box of matches. Very eagerly I tried them. They were
I found myself in the same grey light and tumult I have already
'I found the Palace of Green Porcelain, when we approached it about
if we began our existence fifty miles above the earth's surface.'
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
I gave a cry of surprise. 'Good heavens! man, what's the matter?'
'I got up after a time, and began walking aimlessly through the
'I grieved to think how brief the dream of the human intellect had
I had a dim impression of scaffolding, but I was already going too
'I had at that time very vague ideas as to the course I should
I had come without arms, without medicine, without anything to
I had felt a sustaining hope of ultimate escape, but that hope was
I had got there, and why I had such a profound sense of desertion
I had hitherto seen. It was larger than the largest of the palaces
I had placed a month between myself and these monsters. But I was
I had pulled them over so as to go forward with them, and when I
I had seen of the Morlocks--that, by the by, was the name by which
I had startled in my first passionate search for the Time Machine.
I had to butt in the dark with my head--I could hear the Morlock's
'I had to clamber down a shaft of perhaps two hundred yards. The
I had traversed. And during these few revolutions all the activity,
... I hardly believe it myself.... And yet...'
'I have already told you of the sickness and confusion that comes
'_I_ have not,' said the Provincial Mayor.
'I have thought since how particularly ill-equipped I was for such
II
III
I judged. The place was very silent. The thick dust deadened our
I knew him, had been swept out of existence. Instead were these
I knew that such assurance was folly, knew instinctively that the
'I know,' he said, after a pause, 'that all this will be absolutely
ill-lit, the floor of it running downward at a slight angle from the
'I looked about me to see if any traces of animal life remained. A
I looked at the lawn again. A queer doubt chilled my complacency.
'I looked for the building I knew. Then my eye travelled along to
'I looked up again at the crouching white shape, and the full
I looked up again Weena had disappeared.
I made my essay. I never felt such a disappointment as I did in
'I'm all right.' He stopped, held out his glass for more, and took
'I'm hanged if it isn't a quarter to one,' said the Journalist.
'I might have consoled myself by imagining the little people had put
immediately came another by my ear. I struck at this, and caught
impartiality, turning towards the Time Traveller.
impenetrable darkness, their eyes were abnormally large and
impenetrably dark to me. I entered it groping, for the change from
imperceptible in a hundred human lifetimes, had long since
impossible, somehow, to feel any humanity in the things. Only my
impressed me as being very strong, and I hoped to find my bar of
impression of automatic organization, I fear I can convey very
'I must confess that my satisfaction with my first theories of an
I must descend for the solution of my difficulties. And withal I
inactivity. We are kept keen on the grindstone of pain and
in all the differences of texture and bearing that now mark off the
in a melodious whirl of laughter and laughing speech.
'In a moment I was clutched by several hands, and there was no
'In another moment we were standing face to face, I and this fragile
in attitude to mount again.
incessant stream, as it seemed, from behind me, and away through the
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
incline to overlook this fact. There are really four dimensions,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
incomprehensible remarks about the Dark Nights. It was not now
incontinently went out. But I had my hand on the climbing bars now,
increase and multiply. Evidently, I thought, this tendency had
increased in number. From the edge of the sea came a ripple and
increased till Industry had gradually lost its birthright in the
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
incredible to you. To me the one incredible thing is that I am here
incredulous, and how there in the laboratory we beheld a larger
in decay. But this attitude of mind was impossible. However great
indeed a clumsy swaying of the machine, for which I was unable to
indeed for all Time, in the space of Time across which my machine
indeed, they almost got away from me. As it slipped from my hand,
indescribably frail. His flushed face reminded me of the more
indicated the laboratory--'and when that is put together I mean to
indistinct, was seen as a ghost for a second perhaps, as an eddy of
indistinct, you must understand. I was feeling that chill,
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
in earnest about this? Do you seriously believe that that machine
inequalities of the surface, man had no freedom of vertical
I never followed up the thought--of what might have happened, or
inevitable process of decay that had been staved off for a time, and
inevitably fall back upon and destroy its makers in the end. If that
in exactly the place where I had saved Weena, and that suddenly gave
infirmity of the flesh, which I will explain to you in a moment, we
influence of the Eloi, whose disgust of the Morlocks I now began
in for it now," and, feeling my way along the tunnel, I found the
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
In my excitement I fancied that they would receive my invasion of
in my jacket, and sat down beside her to wait for the moonrise. The
in my last view of the world of Eight Hundred and Two Thousand Seven
in my pocket, too, if a blaze were needed. It seemed to me that
'I nodded, pointed to the sun, and gave them such a vivid rendering
in our own time, and in this future age it was complete. This, I
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
in soft moss, the arm-rests cast and filed into the resemblance of
in spite of my grief, this seat and the tranquil view and the warm
instance, they taught you at school is founded on a misconception.'
instance, was a great heap of granite, bound together by masses of
instant's pause I followed it into the second heap of ruins. I could
instead of being carried vertically at the sides, were spread so
instead of casting about among the trees for fallen twigs, I began
intellectual age, that I gave no thought to the possibilities it
intelligence, and those big abundant ruins, and it strengthened my
intelligence. That I could see clearly enough already. What had
intense relief, I saw dimly coming up, a foot to the right of me, a
interest, and hurry on ahead!'
interest I might have expected in them.
interesting than this spectacle of oldtime geology in decay.
interest, their little eyes shining over the fruit they were eating.
intermittent darknesses, I saw the moon spinning swiftly through her
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
interruptions. I want to tell it. Badly. Most of it will sound like
interval of darkness. And I now understood to some slight degree at
intervention my invention had vanished. Yet, for one thing I felt
In that, however, I was wrong.
in the blackness.
'In the matter of sepulture, for instance, I could see no signs of
in the protection of its glare. Accordingly, as we went along I
in the rudimentary stage. The science of our time has attacked but
in the sky appeared the edge of the sun. I got off the machine to
in the smoking-room. He was coming from the house. He had a small
in the Time I saw. To adorn themselves with flowers, to dance, to
in the westward sky, and the life of the old earth ebb away. At
into a pit: my concern was with the pit and how to get out of it.
intolerable. And the Morlocks made their garments, I inferred, and
into my head the memory of the meat I had seen in the Under-world.
into my pocket by Weena, when I travelled into Time.' He stared
intonation of his voice. You cannot know how his expression followed
into non-existence.
'Into the future or the past--I don't, for certain, know which.'
into the future to carry on a miniature flirtation. Yet her distress
into the great hall, and so out upon the flagstones in front of the
into the shaft. I lay down on the edge, for the throb of the great
in upon me through the lessening storm. I was seized with a panic
inventive, as you know.
'In which case they would certainly plough you for the Little-go.
in white by the unmelted hailstones piled along their courses. I
I perceived, standing strange and gaunt in the centre of the hall,
I perceived that all had the same form of costume, the same soft
I put it? Suppose you found an inscription, with sentences here and
I remarked his lameness and the soft padding sound of his footfall,
iron not altogether inadequate for the work.
irreverent young men. 'Our Special Correspondent in the Day
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
is an odd twinkling appearance about this bar, as though it was in
'I sat up in the freshness of the morning, trying to remember how
I saw huge buildings rise up faint and fair, and pass like dreams.
'I saw one little thing that seemed odd to me. I think I have told
I saw the aperture, a small blue disk, in which a star was visible,
'I saw the heads of two orange-clad people coming through the bushes
I saw the laboratory exactly as before. Had anything happened? For
'I say,' said the Editor hilariously, 'these chaps here say you have
'I searched again for traces of Weena, but there were none. It was
I shared a cab with the Editor. He thought the tale a 'gaudy lie.'
'Is not that rather a large thing to expect us to begin upon?' 
'is only a model. It is my plan for a machine to travel through
is so, it remains for us to live as though it were not so. But to me
is the compensation for change, danger, and trouble. An animal
'I stopped very gently and sat upon the Time Machine, looking round.
it, and overflowing it, the dawn came, pale at first, and then
it as a story, what do you think of it?'
it. But at my first gesture towards this they behaved very oddly. I
it, either to the right or the left. Feeling tired--my feet, in
it fell, then this morning it rose again, and so gently upward to
'I think I have said how much hotter than our own was the weather
'I think I must have had a kind of frenzy. I remember running
'I think so,' murmured the Provincial Mayor; and, knitting his
I think that at that time none of us quite believed in the Time
I thought I heard a sound like a chuckle--but I must have been
'I thought not.'
'I thought of the flickering pillars and of my theory of an
'I thought of the physical slightness of the people, their lack of
I thrust where I judged their faces might be. I could feel the
'It is a law of nature we overlook, that intellectual versatility
it is a logical consequence enough. Strength is the outcome of need;
'It is simply this. That Space, as our mathematicians have it, is
it lived. And now came the reaction of the altered conditions.
'It may seem odd to you, but it was two days before I could follow
It occurred to me even then, that in the course of a few days the
it off at a draught. 'That's good,' he said. His eyes grew brighter,
'I told some of you last Thursday of the principles of the Time
I took my hands from the machine.
'I took Weena's hand. Then, struck with a sudden idea, I left her
I tried him once more. As he turned off, like the others, my temper
'I tried to call to them, but the language they had was apparently
'It's a curious thing,' said the Medical Man; 'but I certainly don't
'It's against reason,' said Filby.
it's all humbug, you know.'
'It's beautifully made,' he said.
its career. I gave it a last tap, tried all the screws again, put
It seemed odd how it floated into my mind: not stirred up as it
It seemed that they vanished among the bushes. The dawn was still
'It seemed to me that I had happened upon humanity upon the wane.
'It seems a pity to let the dinner spoil,' said the Editor of a
'It sounds plausible enough to-night,' said the Medical Man; 'but
it spreads its operations very steadily and persistently. Our
it's sound enough. I expected to finish it on Friday, but on Friday,
its time therein, till, in the end--! Even now, does not an East-end
It's too long a story to tell over greasy plates.' And ringing the
it struck me that they were very badly broken and weather-worn.
its zenith, and was now far fallen into decay. The too-perfect
it. Take it as a lie--or a prophecy. Say I dreamed it in the
'It took two years to make,' retorted the Time Traveller. Then, when
'It troubled her greatly, but in the end her odd affection for me
I turned this over in my mind I continued to descend. At last, with
'It was after that, I think, that we came to a little open court
'It was from her, too, that I learned that fear had not yet left the
it was inflammable and burned with a good bright flame--was, in
'It was this restlessness, this insecurity, perhaps, that drove me
'It was time for a match. But to get one I must put her down. I did
it went to my heart to tire her down, and leave her at last,
it with his fingernail; at which the Silent Man, who had been
It would be hard to convey the stillness of it. All the sounds of
'It would be remarkably convenient for the historian,' the
IV
'I wandered during the afternoon along the valley of the Thames, but
'I was afraid to push my way in among all this machinery in the
I was free.
'I was in an agony of discomfort. I had some thought of trying to go
I was in the dark--trapped. So the Morlocks thought. At that I
I was reminded by an advertisement that I had promised to meet
'I was very tired, too, after the excitements of the day; so I
I woke again it was full day, and a couple of sparrows were hopping
I woke with a start, and with an odd fancy that some greyish animal
I wore about indoors--so that I was lame. And it was already long
IX
jar, that by chance, I suppose, had been really hermetically sealed.
joined the Editor in the easy work of heaping ridicule on the whole
joint I saw. It was all very indistinct: the heavy smell, the big
journey. As I stood sick and confused I saw again the moving thing
judged by the going to and fro of past generations, as to be deeply
judged that my eye had been deceived, and that the black object was
Just before that I seemed to see Hillyer for a moment; but he passed
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Kensington! Here, apparently, was the Palaeontological Section,
kind of madness growing upon me, I flung myself into futurity. At
knife and fork with a grunt, and the Silent Man followed suit. The
knowledge, art, everything. Then one of them suddenly asked me a
know of course that a mathematical line, a line of thickness _nil_,
know the natural order of these flowers. May I have them?'
knuckles.
laboratory, and being on easy terms in the house, I went up to him.
laboratory, my tools, my appliances just as I had left them. I got
lame, and I felt the intensest wretchedness for the horrible death
languages, literatures, aspirations, even the mere memory of Man as
large, for a silver birch-tree touched its shoulder. It was of white
large, halted motionless upon the horizon, a vast dome glowing with
largely because of the mystery on the other side. They had never
larger underground factories, spending a still-increasing amount of
last, more than thirty million years hence, the huge red-hot dome of
last, one by one, swiftly, one after the other, the white peaks of
late did I clearly understand what she was to me. For, by merely
latter from the beginning to the end of our lives.'
laugh about me, and, having smiled and gesticulated in a friendly
laughed hugely. I remember him standing in the open doorway, bawling
laughing and dancing in the sunlight as though there was no such
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
lay awake most of the night thinking about it. I determined to go
laying hands upon them and shaking them up together. It must have
lay my path. For all I knew, I might be facing back towards the
leaping it every minute, and every minute marking a day. I supposed
leaping up and dragging down branches. Very soon I had a choking
least at my command; and then I got to demonstrative pronouns, and
least the reason of the fear of the little Upper-world people for
leather belt. Sandals or buskins--I could not clearly distinguish
leave ghosts, he argued, the world at last will get overcrowded with
left to my own unaided efforts, and the thought of flight before
Length, Breadth, Thickness, and--Duration. But through a natural
less, and that consequently my pace was over a year a minute; and
less than a mile across. If we could get through it to the bare
'Let's see your experiment anyhow,' said the Psychologist, 'though
lever in my hands, I put all my weight upon it sideways. Suddenly
levers--I will show you the method later--prevented any one from
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
License.  You must require such a user to return or
lichen in caves: plants which like these grow in a perpetual
life.
life that I could see at first was the intensely green vegetation
light, and waved it in their dazzled faces. You can scarce imagine
light. At last, some time before I stopped, the sun, red and very
light before me I should discover the Time Machine and escape. I
light burned my fingers and fell out of my hand, going out as it
lightening with the promise of the sun.
light in the north-east. The bright little figures ceased to move
Lightning may blast and blacken, but it rarely gives rise to
light of the lamp was the machine sure enough, squat, ugly, and
lights in the lilies of silver caught the bubbles that flashed and
light. The floor was made up of huge blocks of some very hard white
light to blackness made spots of colour swim before me. Suddenly I
light was to put them into a tumult of apprehension. I never found
like a flash.
like a rocket. As I returned, I passed again across that minute when
like a rocket. I pressed the lever over to its extreme position. The
likewise. With a pretty absence of ceremony they began to eat the
Literary Archive Foundation
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
little disordered. I was oppressed with perplexity and doubt. Once
little doses when they felt inclined. And very little doses I found
little from my mind.
little interest. I am no specialist in mineralogy, and I went on
little lawn. I wasted some time in futile questionings, conveyed, as
little lawn, two miles perhaps, in ten minutes. And I am not a young
little levers that would set it in motion, and put these in my
little of the difference to your mind.
little one, in my right hand I had my iron bar.
little people, and with the big open portals that yawned before me
little Rosebery, will you? What will you take for the lot?'
little table of white metal, laid with what seemed a meal. The
little teeth nipping at my neck. I rolled over, and as I did so my
little thing. The matches were of that abominable kind that light
'Little Weena ran with me. She danced beside me to the well, but
liverworts and lichens, seemed lifeless. And now it was flecked with
loathed them. Before, I had felt as a man might feel who had fallen
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
London, for instance, there are new electric railways, there are
longed very much to kill a Morlock or so. Very inhuman, you may
longer see the Palace of Green Porcelain, and I was in doubt of my
long since dropped to pieces, and every semblance of print had left
look at it. Quartz it seemed to be.
looked more curiously and less fearfully at this world of the remote
looked round me. A colossal figure, carved apparently in some white
'Look here,' said the Medical Man, 'are you perfectly serious?
looking at it for a little space--half a minute, perhaps, or half an
'Looking at these stars suddenly dwarfed my own troubles and all
looking at the timepiece, saw the hour was almost eight o'clock. I
looking down, I saw a small, white, moving creature, with large
looking in this impossible place and that; of groping among moon-lit
'Looking round with a sudden thought, from a terrace on which I
look nearly into the dim elusive world that raced and fluctuated
loose a quivering horror that made me quick to elude him. At one
losing my own age, of being left helpless in this strange new world.
loyal alliance of capable men, upon self-restraint, patience, and
luxurious after-dinner atmosphere when thought roams gracefully
lying. So be it! It's true--every word of it, all the same. I was in
machine altogether lost--perhaps destroyed? It behoves me to be
Machine, and showed you the actual thing itself, incomplete in the
machine. But I saw nothing moving, in earth or sky or sea. The green
Machine? For I felt sure it was they who had taken it. Why, too, if
Machine. I walked slowly, for I was almost exhausted, as well as
machinery. I called to mind that it was already far advanced in the
Machine. The fact is, the Time Traveller was one of those men who
machine. Then came one hand upon me and then another. Then I had
Machine was only to be recovered by boldly penetrating these
machine was removed out of my reach. My breath came with pain. I
machine, wasting good breath thereby. I cried aloud, and none
made her cling to me. Until it was too late, I did not clearly know
made me heavy of a sudden. Moreover, the vapour of camphor was in
made me think that its rare emergence above ground was the outcome
made up of words, of letters even, absolutely unknown to you? Well,
maintained them in their habitual needs, perhaps through the
make a resolute attempt to learn the speech of these new men of
make her understand that we were seeking a refuge there from her
make myself such arms of metal or stone as I could contrive. That
making uncanny noises to each other, as the glare of the fire beat
mallows, upon the little table. Then he resumed his narrative.
man devised. Although it was at my own expense, I could not help
Man had not remained one species, but had differentiated into two
man. I cursed aloud, as I ran, at my confident folly in leaving the
manner, running across the sunlit space behind me. It blundered
manoeuvring with my matches and Weena, I had turned myself about
man, the bleating of sheep, the cries of birds, the hum of insects,
Man was standing before the fire with a sheet of paper in one hand
Man, who rang the bell--the Time Traveller hated to have servants
marble, in shape something like a winged sphinx, but the wings,
master the perspective of the thing. See?'
match and went on past the dusty curtains, of which I have told you.
matches, and I struck some to amuse them. I tried them again about
matches. If only I had thought of a Kodak! I could have flashed that
matches. The box must have leaked before it was lost.
mathematical plane. These things are mere abstractions.'
Mathematical Society only a month or so ago. You know how on a flat
mattered; I was, so to speak, attenuated--was slipping like a vapour
may be, of course, that the floor did not slope, but that the museum
me!
me.
me a keen stab of pain. And like blots upon the landscape rose the
me, and I came to a large open space, and striking another match,
means of fire, so that I should have the weapon of a torch at hand,
mean to take your machine away, it's little good your wrecking their
meat that I had seen. I felt assured now of what it was, and from
me, but I contained myself. The hillock, as I have said, was a kind
mechanical servants: but that had long since passed away. The two
mechanism, and I was inclined to linger among these; the more so as
meddle. I came back through the corridor. The Time Traveller met me
me disturb you,' he said, with a certain faltering articulation.
me from going straight down the gallery and killing the brutes I
me in that rayless obscurity, and they did not seem to have any fear
me it was a most fortunate thing. Yet, oddly enough, I found a far
me, more massive than any buildings of our own time, and yet, as it
men, but with the riddles of our own time answered and its wearisome
mere creatures of the half light. "They must have been ghosts," I
mere heaps of rust and lignite, sometimes fresher. In one place I
merely a rock. The stars in the sky were intensely bright and seemed
merely temporary and social difference between the Capitalist and
mere mist upon its scale. Still slower, until the dim outlines of a
merest accident I discovered, in an air-tight case, two dynamite
merged at last into a kind of hysterical exhilaration. I remarked
merriment, to my mind.
me shudder. It was so like a human spider! It was clambering down
metallic framework, scarcely larger than a small clock, and very
metal, not plates nor slabs--blocks, and it was so much worn, as I
me, the refined beauty and the etiolated pallor followed naturally
me: the sense of some hitherto unsuspected power, through whose
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
met, I guessed, and population had ceased to increase.
me to shirk, by another day, an experience I dreaded. I resolved I
me, towards the garden door. I suppose it took her a minute or so to
met with a stare of surprise or inextinguishable laughter, but
me. Very calmly I tried to strike the match. I had only to fix on
me, wondering where I could bathe. I felt weary, stiff, and
Mexican, Grecian, Phoenician, every country on earth I should think.
midway between the pedestal of the sphinx and the marks of my feet
might be happening, to the living things in the sea.
might be. Yet it was too horrible! I looked at little Weena sleeping
might mean. The moon was on the wane: each night there was a longer
might, perhaps, have moralized upon the futility of all ambition.
mile and a half away, from which I could get a wider view of this
million dial was at zero, I slackened speed. I began to recognize
mind, I went down to the great building of stone. The big hall was
mind was wool-gathering. Then, 'Remarkable Behaviour of an Eminent
mine. Clearly that was the next thing to do. The fruits seemed a
_minus_ the head. Here too were acacias. So far I had seen nothing of
minute by minute the white snow flashed across the world, and
minute I felt a tug at my coat, then something at my arm. And Weena
minutes I trembled violently. Then I became calmer. Around me was
minute's strain, and I rejoined her with a mace in my hand more than
miraculous, I was presently left alone for the first time. With a
miscellaneous objects was shrouded in the same grey covering. Then
mistaken. Then I got a big pebble from the river, and came and
mistaking that they were trying to haul me back. I struck another
moaning, as the day grew clearer, I tied some grass about my feet
moaning wind. I saw the black central shadow of the eclipse sweeping
modest _cancan_, in part a step dance, in part a skirt-dance (so far
moment I was in a passion of fear and running with great leaping
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
monsters, the uniform poisonous-looking green of the lichenous
moon must pass through its last quarter, and the nights grow dark,
more abundant. And on both these days I had the restless feeling of
more firmly upon the machine. Looking round me again, I saw that,
more than a savage or an animal has of staying six feet above the
Morlocks about me--three battered at my feet--and then I recognized,
Morlocks, and they were closing in upon me. Indeed, in another
Morlocks and was speedily clambering up the shaft, while they stayed
Morlocks at any rate were carnivorous! Even at the time, I remember
Morlocks came blundering into me, and I drove them off with blows
Morlocks' path. It was a close race. Once the flames crept forward
Morlocks put their heads down in a kind of agony and rush into the
Morlocks with it.
morning I perceived clearly enough that my curiosity regarding the
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
most plausible one. But even on this supposition the balanced
motion! I felt the same horrible anticipation, too, of an imminent
motion towards the wine. The Editor filled a glass of champagne, and
motives; a pork butcher could understand Filby. But the Time
mountaineering, and from that I judged the air to be more rarefied
move about in Time.'
moved.
movement.'
movement of the barometer. Yesterday it was so high, yesterday night
much about time travelling in the interval between that Thursday and
much the same wonder at what will come next as I felt then. I took
museum, upon the thick soft carpeting of dust, to Weena's huge
must be forgotten.
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
must have heard me hammering in gusty outbreaks a mile away on
must remind you, was my speculation at the time. Later, I was to
my arrival. I thought of my hasty conclusions upon that evening and
my business, I found myself wondering at my intense excitement
my closer attention to the pedestal. It was, as I think I have said,
my comfort, two strange white flowers--shrivelled now, and brown and
'My dear sir, that is just where you are wrong. That is just where
my desperate onset and turned over. It struck my chin violently. One
my ears, and a strange, dumb confusedness descended on my mind.
my element, for rising on either side of me were the huge bulks of
my eyes.
my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, sufficient light for me to
my face. Starting up in the darkness I snatched at my matches and,
my hands and steadfastly looked into the glaring eyeballs. I was
my hunger was satisfied. I was continually meeting more of these men
'My impression of it is, of course, imperfect; but I know it was a
my laboratory at four o'clock, and since then ... I've lived eight
my matches because I had no hand free. Upon my left arm I carried my
my mind came round to the business of stopping.
my motion. Slower and slower went the circling hands until the
my old workshop again, exactly as it had been. I might have slept
my own kind--a strange animal in an unknown world. I must have raved
my part--I fancied even that there was a certain lack of the
my second hypothesis was all wrong. The Upper-world people might
myself and my apparatus out of all possible dimensions--into the
myself and these of the Golden Age! I was sensible of much which was
myself. I laughed aloud.
myself impeded by the childish simplicity of the little people, and
myself that, at any rate, there was nothing to fear, and that there
myself that I could never stop, and with a gust of petulance I
myself the most complicated and the most hopeless trap that ever a
myself. Without further delay I determined to make myself arms and a
'My sensations would be hard to describe. As the columns of hail
mysterious Fear, I was differently constituted. I came out of this
my theorizing passed into dozing. Catching myself at that, I took my
my third. It had almost burned through when I reached the opening
Nature never appeals to intelligence until habit and instinct are
nature of my loss that maddened me. I felt hopelessly cut off from
nearest building, and so I was led past the sphinx of white marble,
nearest the fire, and I drew this forward so as to be almost between
'Necessarily my memory is vague. Great shapes like big machines rose
necessity, and, it seemed to me, that here was that hateful
necessity--indeed there is no necessity--for an efficient family,
necessity was immediate. In the next place, I hoped to procure some
neck and cheek; there was not the faintest suggestion of it on the
need of change. Only those animals partake of intelligence that have
nerved me rather to proceed. I shook her off, perhaps a little
never convince me.'
new metal, and still fairly sound. But any cartridges or powder
new moon. Weena had put this into my head by some at first
next day and see the Time Traveller again. I was told he was in the
next morning, and ere the dusk I purposed pushing through the woods
nickel bars was exactly one inch too short, and this I had to get
night came like the turning out of a lamp, and in another moment
night Weena was among them--and feeling reassured by their presence.
no convenient cicerone in the pattern of the Utopian books. My
no definite reason. I remember creeping noiselessly into the great
no difference between Time and any of the three dimensions of Space
no dimensions, are passing along the Time-Dimension with a uniform
noise of machinery grow louder. Presently the walls fell away from
no more. Even that would fade in the end into a contented
no more of them.
None of us quite knew how to take it.
noon, deserted and falling into ruin. Only ragged vestiges of glass
nor economical struggle. The shop, the advertisement, traffic, all
'Nor, having only length, breadth, and thickness, can a cube have a
north-west, against the wall where you saw it. That gives you the
"No," said I stoutly to myself, "that was not the lawn."
no saltpeter; indeed, no nitrates of any kind. Doubtless they had
'No, sir. No one has come out this way. I was expecting to find him
'Not a bit,' said the Time Traveller, and, to the Psychologist: 'You
not even satisfy myself whether or not she breathed.
'Not exactly,' said the Medical Man. 'There are balloons.'
not find it at first; but, after a time in the profound obscurity, I
nothing in this at all alarming. Indeed, there was something in
nothingness. The great buildings about me stood out clear and
nothing on them but a pair of tattered, blood-stained socks. Then the
noticed his lameness.
noticed that the floor of the gallery sloped at all. [Footnote: It
no time in stanching the blood, but jumped up and ran on, with a
not observe the carving very narrowly, though I fancied I saw
not there. I seemed to see a ghostly, indistinct figure sitting in
not the sole descendants of our generation, but that this bleached,
'Now as I stood and examined it, finding a pleasure in the mere
now brown, now green; they grew, spread, shivered, and passed away.
Now I felt like a beast in a trap, whose enemy would come upon him
now. I had in my possession a thing that was, perhaps, the best of
'Now, indeed, I seemed in a worse case than before. Hitherto,
now, I slowed the mechanism down.
'Now, I still think that for this box of matches to have escaped
'Now, it is very remarkable that this is so extensively overlooked,'
now mere dreams had become projects deliberately put in hand and
now. So soon as my appetite was a little checked, I determined to
now there are existing circumstances to point that way. There is
'Now, the smoke of the fire beat over towards me, and it must have
now, with my growing knowledge, I felt very differently towards
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
nursery with egg-shell china. So I don't think any of us said very
obscene, nocturnal Thing, which had flashed before me, was also heir
observation went, never opened his mouth all the evening. There was
obvious conclusion, but it was absolutely wrong.
Occidental for a long vigil. I could work at a problem for years,
occupations are mere militant necessities of an age of physical
oddest confidence in me; for once, in a foolish moment, I made
oddly truncated at the end, and a click and a thud. A gust of air
odd, too, how speedily I came to disregard these little people. I
of a creative tendency. There were no shops, no workshops, no sign
of a day or two things got back to the old footing. I made what
of all sorts; unnecessary things now, and things that make us
'Of all the wild extravagant theories!' began the Psychologist.
of a long-continued underground habit. In the first place, there was
of amusement. However, I felt like a schoolmaster amidst children,
of an extreme sensitiveness of the retina.
of another monster crab that stood just behind me. Its evil eyes
of a thunderclap as startled them. They all withdrew a pace or so
of bluish-green, of a certain type of Chinese porcelain. This
of bronze. It was not a mere block, but highly decorated with deep
of camphor, and went on gathering my bonfire. Presently I noticed
of cattle. We improve them gradually, because our ideals are vague
of concrete substantives and verbs. There seemed to be few, if any,
'Of course,' said the Psychologist, and reassured us. 'That's a
Of course the things were dummies, as I might have guessed from
of dawn were mingled in a ghastly half-light. The bushes were inky
of day and night, which was usually indicative of a slower pace,
of death came over my soul. The forest seemed full of the smell of
off from the natural surface of the earth?
of fire, a brilliant arch, in space; the moon a fainter fluctuating
off the thing very shakily, and sat down upon my bench. For several
of his cigar--the sixth. The Journalist fumbled for his watch. The
of horrible fatigue, as the long night of despair wore away; of
of importations among them. They spent all their time in playing
of island in the forest. From its summit I could now make out
of it--and with brown spots and smears upon the ivory, and bits of
of it, for the ventilation of their caverns; and if they refused,
of it having the lustre, as well as the pale-green tint, a kind
of little Weena. It seemed an overwhelming calamity. Now, in this
of lying on the ground near the sphinx and weeping with absolute
of making a fire. And then down in the remote blackness of the
of man.
of mankind before it settled down into perfect harmony with the
of me apart from the light. But, so soon as I struck a match in
of my fists, trembling as I did so.
of place. For countless years I judged there had been no danger of
of receipt of the work.
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
of sleeping houses, and by a statue--a Faun, or some such figure,
of social stratification, less and less frequent. So, in the end,
of some carnal cravings, I had to be frugivorous also. Indeed, I
of starlight between the branches, and vanish. And at that I
of tall spikes of strange white flowers, measuring a foot perhaps
often just such a flicker in the air as one sees on a hot day above
of that salt ocean, all bloody under the eternal sunset, was still
of the beautiful Upper-worlders? And what was hidden down there,
of the candle. But how the trick was done he could not explain.
of the change that had startled me.
of the future, who would follow me a little distance, chatter and
of the human type was even far more profound than among the "Eloi,"
of their absolute helplessness and misery in the glare, and I struck
of the Journalist and the legs of the Silent Man from the knees
of the _Philosophical Transactions_ and my own seventeen papers upon
of the sphinx I found the bronze valves were open. They had slid
of the summer sky, some faint brown shreds of cloud whirled into
of the thing was to be seen. I felt faint and cold when I faced the
of the world had to be mastered. I had not, I said to myself, come
of the years I had spent in study and toil to get into the future
of this Golden Age. I cannot account for it. It may be that the sun
of this was the Time Machine. I had the small levers in my pocket.
of three dimensions they could represent one of four--if they could
of years ago. I was about to throw it away, but I remembered that
of yore. Southward (as I judged it) was a very bright red star that
'Oh, _this_,' began Filby, 'is all--'
old familiar room, it is more like the sorrow of a dream than an
once have been the favoured aristocracy, and the Morlocks their
once sucked swiftly out of sight.
once. Then he turned to the two others who were following him and
One cannot choose but wonder. Will he ever return? It may be that he
one-hundredth of what it would make if it were not travelling in
one, in particular, that seemed to be in season all the time I was
One lay by the path up the hill, which I had followed during my
'One might get one's Greek from the very lips of Homer and Plato,'
One might invest all one's money, leave it to accumulate at
one more drop of oil on the quartz rod, and sat myself in the
one out of doors, or one sleeping alone within doors, after dark.
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
one time it had for a little while glowed more brilliantly again,
One was so blinded by the light that he came straight for me, and I
one who shirks an inevitable duty. I felt assured that the Time
'One word,' said I. 'Have you been time travelling?'
one would expect; for the strength of a man and the softness of a
on its interminable voyage. We all saw the lever turn. I am
only a dream? They say life is a dream, a precious poor dream at
only on the box.
only the vaguest guesses at what they were for. I fancied that if
only waiting for the darkness to come at me again! Then the match
on their ant-hill going hither and thither and waiting for the dark.
on them. The coiling uprush of smoke streamed across the sky, and
on the table by the door. I found the date was indeed to-day, and
on the third day of my visit, that was how the world of Eight
on the Time Machine, a matter of a week, no rain had fallen. So,
onward. I had been without sleep for a night and two days, and I was
open hill.
opportunities to fix the problem.
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
or cunning. And with that I scrambled to my feet and looked about
order to see them, they fled incontinently, vanishing into dark
ordinary evening clothes, and nothing save his haggard look remained
organism. But, clearly, the old order was already in part reversed.
originally the place had been artificially lit. Here I was more in
Or is this a trick--like that ghost you showed us last Christmas?'
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
or ruins I knew, and the facade had an Oriental look: the face
or so past ten; now it was nearly half-past three!
or tumulus, surmounted by a scorched hawthorn. Beyond this was
or twice I had a feeling of intense fear for which I could perceive
other. After a time we ceased to do that, and looked only at the
others among the Eloi. Then, for a time, I was insensible.
others, as far as I remember, were motionless.
'Our ancestors had no great tolerance for anachronisms.'
our consciousness moves intermittently in one direction along the
our eyes. Parts were of nickel, parts of ivory, parts had certainly
our faces with a certain dull approval, and then went round the warm
our five-year-old children--asked me, in fact, if I had come from
our human needs.
our minds: its plausibility, that is, its practical incredibleness,
our old world under the sunset of that long day. It was as sweet and
our own pretty and familiar architecture, the thousands hand ran back
our planet in the year Eight Hundred and Two Thousand Seven Hundred
our position. Night was creeping upon us, and my inaccessible
our retreat.
out in the early morning towards a well near the ruins of granite
out of the dimness, and cast grotesque black shadows, in which dim
out of the room, and we heard his slippers shuffling down the long
out of the way." Nevertheless, I ran with all my might. All the
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
out under the moonlight. I heard cries of terror and their little
over his shoulder. The Medical Man and the Provincial Mayor watched
over in my course, went blundering across the big dining-hall again,
over my face, and I was sensible of a peculiar unpleasant odour. I
overnight. I made a careful examination of the ground about the
over one of the malachite tables, almost breaking my shin. I lit a
over their heads was a tangled waste of beautiful bushes and
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
own hint, and spreading myself out upon the turf I had a long and
own, I ever saw in that Golden Age. When I saw them I ceased
own inadequacy--to express its quality. You read, I will suppose,
page at http://pglaf.org
painful, and feeling sorely begrimed. I saw the _Pall Mall Gazette_
palace. I thought I would make a virtue of necessity, and see the
Palace of Green Porcelain. I found myself in a cold sweat. I had to
Palace of Green Porcelain was a piece of self-deception, to enable
palpitation of night and day merged into one continuous greyness;
panels. I thought I heard something stir inside--to be explicit,
paper testified. At the time I will confess that I thought chiefly
paper. What was he going to do before lunch-time? Then suddenly
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
paralyse and mystery has lost its terrors. I at least would defend
parapets and tall columns, with a wooded hill-side dimly creeping
parental self-devotion, all found their justification and support in
parents. I judged, then, that the children of that time were
part, cannot think that these latter days of weak experiment,
particularly--why not another direction at right angles to the other
particular state visit http://pglaf.org
particular, were very sore--I carefully lowered Weena from my
passage to his laboratory.
passage to tell the Time Traveller.
passed in our glasses. Our chairs, being his patents, embraced and
passing across the sun's disk. Naturally, at first I took it to be
past me, and went on straight into the fire!
past sunset when I came in sight of the palace, silhouetted black
pattering about me. I pushed on grimly. The pattering grew more
pattern, were broken in many places, and the curtains that hung
paws with his foot, or as a man enjoys killing animals in sport:
pedestal. But how it got there was a different problem.
pedestal was hollow. Examining the panels with care I found them
peering and blinking up at me: all but one little wretch who
people avoided me. It may have been my fancy, or it may have had
people have got hold of the wrong side of that idea. You have all
people in all walks of life.
people moved hither and thither among the trees. Some were bathing
perceive their import.
perfection--absolute permanency. Apparently as time went on, the
perfectly good. They were not even damp. I turned to Weena. "Dance,"
perfectly in harmony with its environment is a perfect mechanism.
perfect world there had been no unemployed problem, no social
perforce rather more initiative, if less of every other human
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
perhaps, a couple of hundred people dining in the hall, and most of
perhaps a foot from the floor, and upon these were heaps of fruits.
perhaps still stranger story, and the specimens and photographs he
perhaps through many thousands of centuries. It reminded me of a
permanency as its watchword, it had attained its hopes--to come
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
philosophical people have been asking why _three_ dimensions
phrase--be wandering on some plesiosaurus-haunted Oolitic coral
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
physical optics.
pillar, peering down the well. Apparently it was considered bad form
pinnacles of the Palace of Green Porcelain to her, and contrived to
pipe, and I saw he was looking at some half-healed scars on his
plain enough. The question had come into my mind abruptly: were
plain that they had left her poor little body in the forest. I
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
plants--nettles possibly--but wonderfully tinted with brown about
plants, the thin air that hurts one's lungs: all contributed to an
pleasant instead of black and forbidding. We found some fruit
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
'Plenty of cabs at the station,' said the Psychologist.
pocket. Then I turned again to see what I could do in the way of
pointing to the bronze pedestal, I tried to intimate my wish to open
point. The eyes were large and mild; and--this may seem egotism on
porcelain, and along the face of it I saw an inscription in some
position. I resolved to mount to the summit of a crest, perhaps a
possible insult. I tried a sweet-looking little chap in white next,
possibly historical galleries; it might be, even a library! To me,
'Possibly not,' said the Time Traveller. 'But now you begin to see
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
powerful? I might seem some old-world savage animal, only the more
powers that might be of use against the Morlocks.
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
precessional cycle that the pole of the earth describes. Only forty
prejudice against human flesh is no deep-seated instinct. And so
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
presented. Even my preoccupation about the Time Machine receded a
presented me with a big garland of flowers--evidently made for me
presently a fair-haired little creature seemed to grasp my intention
presently attracted my attention, was the presence of certain
Presently I am going to press the lever, and off the machine will
'Presently I thought what a fool I was to get wet. I stood up and
presently recognized as the decaying vestiges of books. They had
presently she refused to answer them. She shivered as though the
present moment.'
present moment. Our mental existences, which are immaterial and have
preservation of some of their contents.
pressed the first, and almost immediately the second. I seemed to
prettier country is shut in against intrusion. And this same
preventive medicine was attained. Diseases had been stamped out. I
problems solved? Into the manhood of the race: for I, for my own
proceeding, but it came to my mind as an ingenious move for covering
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
Professor Simon Newcomb was expounding this to the New York
profoundly grave and intellectual posterity came, with irresistible
progress I could in the language, and in addition I pushed my
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Project Gutenberg-tm works.
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
protected by a fire. In the morning there was the getting of the
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
Psychologist's face. (The Psychologist, to show that he was not
Psychologist suggested. 'One might travel back and verify the
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
pulsated internally with fire, towards the hiding-place of the Time
pump below made me giddy. Then I felt sideways for the projecting
purposes of civilization; there is the Metropolitan Railway in
pursue. My first was to secure some safe place of refuge, and to
pushed it towards him. He drained it, and it seemed to do him good:
puzzle like that is hopeless. That way lies monomania. Face this
quarters from new to full, and had a faint glimpse of the circling
quartz. Solid to the touch--for I put out my hand and felt the rail
queer little ape-like figure, its head held down in a peculiar
question from outside. I tried to recall the form of it. I had a
question left unsolved. And a great quiet had followed.
questions kept on rising to my lips, and I dare say it was the same
question that showed him to be on the intellectual level of one of
Quiet. Humanity had been strong, energetic, and intelligent, and had
quietly took my hand and stood beside me.
quite near, what I had taken to be a reddish mass of rock was moving
quite sure of his deportment; they were somehow aware that trusting
race until I have hatched this fiction. Treat my assertion of its
ramifications. What so natural, then, as to assume that it was in
ran on all-fours, or only with its forearms held very low. After an
rats and such-like vermin. Even now man is far less discriminating
reaction--possibly a far-reaching explosion--would result, and blow
readjust it. As I did so the shafts of the sun smote through the
real body must have extension in _four_ directions: it must have
real existence.'
realizing to what creatures night by night I lay exposed. I felt
'Really and truly I do.' And he looked frankly into my eyes. He
really saw was the transit of an inner planet passing very near to
real things--'
rearranged them in unfamiliar groupings. But the Milky Way, it
reasonable daylight, I could look my circumstances fairly in the
reason with myself. "Suppose the worst?" I said. "Suppose the
rebounding, dancing hail hung in a cloud over the machine, and drove
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
recover myself. I felt giddy and incapable of facing the return
red. All trace of the moon had vanished. The circling of the stars,
redistribution.
red sun--a little larger, a little duller--the same dying sea, the
reef, or beside the lonely saline lakes of the Triassic Age. Or did
reel; I felt a nightmare sensation of falling; and, looking round,
reflected the light in the same way. I have no doubt they could see
refreshing sleep.
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
relationship. The Eloi, like the Carolingian kings, had decayed
remade; so that the thing was not complete until this morning. It
remained in its windows, and great sheets of the green facing had
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
remains of some vast structure, to what end built I could not
remembered that strange terror of the dark. Overcoming my fear to
reminiscence of the childish days when I used to be forbidden to
remnant of these damned souls still going hither and thither and
remote, and empty save for a few horizontal bars far down in the
remote blue sky shone down upon us here and there. I struck none of
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
require a great effort of memory to recall my explorations in at all
required for the proper assimilation of this, 'know very well that
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
resolved to hold over the adventure for the following day, and I
resolved to stop forthwith. Like an impatient fool, I lugged over
respect. He can go up against gravitation in a balloon, and why
rested and refreshed ourselves. Towards sunset I began to consider
rested for a while, I realized that there were no small houses to be
resting-place; I thought that with my matches and my camphor I could
rest. It was not too soon. My arms ached, my back was cramped, and I
restless energy, that with us is strength, would become weakness.
resumed, the sun got golden again, the sky blue. I breathed with
resumed the thread of my speculations. There were no large buildings
returned, and grew more and more marked. This puzzled me very much
returned to the smoking-room.
returned to the welcome and the caresses of little Weena. But next
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
return to the house of grey stone. But I pointed out the distant
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
Richardson, the publisher, at two. I looked at my watch, and saw
richness as the Thames valley. From every hill I climbed I saw the
risk was inevitable, I no longer saw it in the same cheerful light.
rocks about me were of a harsh reddish colour, and all the trace of
rolling in a paradox, could he?' And then, as the idea came home to
rose, thin and peaked and white. And close behind, and overtaking
roughly, and in another moment I was in the throat of the well. I
round at his audience. They were in the dark, and little spots of
round me on the turf within reach of my arm.
round me smiling and speaking in soft cooing notes to each other, I
round me the Morlocks' eyes shone like carbuncles.
round the room. 'I'm damned if it isn't all going. This room and you
rubbing my eyes and calling upon God to let me awake. Thrice I saw
rudimentary civilization, I thought, might not appear when I came to
ruins and touching strange creatures in the black shadows; at last,
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
running between its fertile banks. The gay robes of the beautiful
saddle, but sideways and in an unstable fashion. For an indefinite
saddle. I suppose a suicide who holds a pistol to his skull feels
said Filby.
said Filby, an argumentative person with red hair.
said he, 'with that thing in there.'
said; "I wonder whence they dated." For a queer notion of Grant
said the Doctor. The Time Traveller did not seem to hear. 'Don't let
said the Psychologist.
said the Time Traveller. 'I'm--funny! Be all right in a minute.'
said to me, leaning back in his easy-chair and naming the three new
said, to question Weena about this Under-world, but here again I was
said. 'What a treat it is to stick a fork into meat again!'
same abundance of splendid buildings, endlessly varied in material
same chill air, and the same crowd of earthy crustacea creeping in
same peculiar cooing sounds from the Morlocks. Soft little hands,
savages of the Age of Unpolished Stone; into the abysses of the
saw her agonized face over the parapet, and smiled to reassure her.
saw no evidence of any contagious diseases during all my stay. And I
saw that I had entered a vast arched cavern, which stretched into
saw that the hail curtain had worn threadbare, and that the sky was
saw their little pink hands feeling at the Time Machine. Happily
saw this grow larger. For a minute perhaps I stared aghast at this
say nothing of a hint at the meaning of the bronze gates and the
'Scientific people,' proceeded the Time Traveller, after the pause
scientific spirit. After all, they were less human and more remote
Scientist,' I heard the Editor say, thinking (after his wont) in
scrub and long grass all about us, and I did not feel safe from
sea margin, with drifting masses further out; but the main expanse
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
security; it takes to art and to eroticism, and then come languor
security of the Upper-worlders had led them to a slow movement of
security sets a premium on feebleness. The work of ameliorating the
see, holding out his hand for a specimen.
seeing she was all right before I left her. I had got to such a low
'Seeing the ease and security in which these people were living, I
seemed, built of glimmer and mist. I saw a richer green flow up the
seemed to be a little lawn in a garden, surrounded by rhododendron
seemed to me greyer--either with dust and dirt or because its colour
seemed to me, was still the same tattered streamer of star-dust as
seemed to rise to a higher pitch of excitement, and their movements
seem grotesque enough to you--and wildly incredible!--and yet even
seeming fond of me, and showing in her weak, futile way that she
seen, and as it shaped itself to me that evening, my interpretation
seen. Apparently the single house, and possibly even the household,
seen me, and their faces were directed towards me.
seen none upon the hill that night. And in the confidence of renewed
selective breeding; now a new and better peach, now a seedless
selfishness. Man had been content to live in ease and delight upon
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
sends the machine gliding into the future, and this other reverses
sense of oppression in my head, and I noticed that I was breathing
sense of the immediate presence of the Morlocks revived at that.
sense of these unseen creatures examining me was indescribably
sensitive, just as are the pupils of the abysmal fishes, and they
sentences were usually simple and of two words, and I failed to
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
sepia painting I had once seen done from the ink of a fossil
serious in my life.'
seriously alarmed, and they made a queer laughing noise as they came
'Serious objections,' remarked the Provincial Mayor, with an air of
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
several big palaces I had explored were mere living places, great
Several more brightly clad people met me in the doorway, and so we
several times, and now I had not the faintest idea in what direction
sexes from each other, these people of the future were alike. And
shadows, I knelt down and lifted her. The wood behind seemed full of
shadowy and mysterious. My general impression of the world I saw
shaft.
shall have to tell you later that even the processes of putrefaction
shallow sandbank had appeared in the sea and the water had receded
shape in my mind. It had been no such triumph of moral education and
shape of my theory; though, for myself, I very soon felt that it
sharer in their degradation and their Fear.
sharpened. I fancied I could even feel the hollowness of the ground
shed blood was in the air. Some way down the central vista was a
sheer descent with as quick a motion as possible. Glancing upward,
sheer nervousness. At last the Time Traveller pushed his plate away,
shelter from the heat and glare in a colossal ruin near the great
'She seemed to have fainted. I put her carefully upon my shoulder
she traversed the laboratory. But now her every motion appeared to
'She wanted to run to it and play with it. I believe she would have
'She was exactly like a child. She wanted to be with me always. She
shivered, and a deadly nausea seized me. Then like a red-hot bow
shivered violently, and became quite still.
shone kindly and steadily like the face of an old friend.
should be willing enough to explain these things to him! And even of
shoulder as I halted, and sat down upon the turf. I could no
should he not hope that ultimately he may be able to stop or
shouted at them as loudly as I could. They started away, and then
shouting--when the Time Traveller came back. He was dressed in
shown _him_ far less scepticism. For we should have perceived his
shuddered with horror to think how they must already have examined
shy man with a beard--whom I didn't know, and who, as far as my
sick and weak. Then I sniffed good wholesome meat, and opened the
side I found what appeared to be sloping shelves, and clearing away
side of me, occasionally darting off on either hand to pick flowers
side windows. At the first glance I was reminded of a museum.
signs of the old constellations in the new confusion. The sky kept
silently placed two withered flowers, not unlike very large white
silver, and beyond, the land rose into blue undulating hills, and
simple explanation I had mastered the problem of the world--mastered
simple point of psychology. I should have thought of it. It's plain
simply a triumph over Nature, but a triumph over Nature and the
simply rose and fell in the west, and grew ever broader and more
simply starving. I've had a most amazing time.' He reached out his
simply to fight against their persistent fingers for my levers, and
since it must have travelled through this time.'
sincere face in the bright circle of the little lamp, nor hear the
sing in the sunlight: so much was left of the artistic spirit, and
size of a football perhaps, or, it may be, bigger, and tentacles
skull ring--to recover it. It was a nearer thing than the fight in
sky, I made a discovery. In my trouser pocket were still some loose
sky. I mean that it had gone deeper and deeper into larger and ever
sky, I saw a curved pale line like a vast new moon.
sky, like the reflection of some colourless fire, and the old moon
slake my thirst for murder my Time Machine might suffer, restrained
sleep.
sleepiness too; so that it was full night before we reached the
slender loophole in the wall. Swinging myself in, I found it was the
sliding to a new adjustment. I had now a clue to the import of these
slightest attempt to rescue the weakly crying little thing which
slime on the rocks alone testified that life was not extinct. A
slipped off my clothes, and, wading in at a point lower down, I
slopes, looking furtively at me. At last, hot and tired, I sat down
slowing down of its rising and setting that the work of the tidal
slowly along, puzzling about the machines, and had been too intent
slowly towards me. Then I saw the thing was really a monstrous
small deer. I remember, too, late that night, beating the bushes
smash. As I put on pace, night followed day like the flapping of a
smeared with green down the sleeves; his hair disordered, and as it
smiling to them and beckoned them to me. They came, and then,
smoke--at times I missed tobacco frightfully--even without enough
smoky fire of green wood and dry sticks, and could economize my
so, and, as I fumbled with my pocket, a struggle began in the
'So, as I see it, the Upper-world man had drifted towards his
social movements, of telephone and telegraph wires, of the Parcels
'Social triumphs, too, had been effected. I saw mankind housed in
so constituted as to be miserable and rebellious would die; and, in
so faded into the serenity of the sky. A peculiar feature, which
so fantastic and incredible, the telling so credible and sober. I
'So far as I could see, all the world displayed the same exuberant
So here, after all my elaborate preparations for the siege of the
'So I came back. For a long time I must have been insensible upon
'So I travelled, stopping ever and again, in great strides of a
solemnly burned a match.
sombre light, among the foliated sheets of intense green.
some extent, I advanced a step and spoke. I will admit that my
Some I recognized as a kind of hypertrophied raspberry and orange,
someone suggested that their plaything should be exhibited in the
'Some sleight-of-hand trick or other,' said the Medical Man, and
some speculation at the dinner-table about the Time Traveller's
something soft. At once the eyes darted sideways, and something
something threadlike. It was drawn swiftly out of my hand. With a
something to do with my hammering at the gates of bronze. Yet I felt
some time, brightening in a quite transitory manner.
some time that I could succeed in persuading myself that the thing I
some way unreal.' He pointed to the part with his finger. 'Also,
'So most people think. But wait a moment. Can an _instantaneous_
soon.
soon destined to take far deadlier possession of my mind.
soon tired and wanted to get away from my interrogations, so I
sorry not to use it.
so soon as I came over the hill.
so swiftly on my right as I ran that I was outflanked and had to
sound of broken glass falling on the floor. The Time Traveller was
sound of its voice was so dismal that I shivered and seated myself
sound of thunder.
south-eastward it grew brighter to a glowing scarlet where, cut by
south-westward towards the rising country that is now called Combe
'So watching, I began to put my interpretation upon the things I had
'So we went on in the quiet, and the twilight deepened into night.
space, and as I did so, a Morlock came blundering towards me, and
Space? Right and left we can go, backward and forward freely enough,
speak to me, but changed his mind. Then the Time Traveller put forth
species that had resulted from the evolution of man were sliding
specimens. In another place was a vast array of idols--Polynesian,
spectral Morlocks sheltered from the glare. The place, by the by,
speed raced round faster and faster. Presently I noted that the sun
Sphinx, into which the Morlocks had carried my machine.
spirit in a zoological museum. And they were filthily cold to the
splendid palaces and magnificent ruins, the same silver river
splendid shelters, gloriously clothed, and as yet I had found them
splitting of the human species. I dare say you will anticipate the
splutter and flare of a match. For they had forgotten about matches.
spoken of as having three dimensions, which one may call Length,
spoken of the great palaces dotted about among the variegated
spoke to them in a strange and very sweet and liquid tongue.
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
squat substantial-looking mass swayed like a bough shaken by the
staggered by these new discoveries. Hitherto I had merely thought
standing here and there upon the slopes; for above them there was
staring at his face, started convulsively, and poured him wine.
stars, for the night was very clear. I felt a certain sense of
stars. Presently, as I went on, still gaining velocity, the
started with the absurd assumption that the men of the Future would
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
startled me. Had it not been for her I do not think I should have
starving for a bit of meat.'
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
States.
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
status with the IRS.
stayed on, waiting for the Time Traveller; waiting for the second,
'Stepping out from behind my tree and looking back, I saw, through
still fairly complete. You know I have a certain weakness for
'Still, however helpless the little people in the presence of their
still needs some little thought outside habit, had probably retained
stillness. Then chairs began to creak and shoes to scrape upon the
still on the same beach, and I saw them distinctly now as soon as I
'Still they could move a little up and down,' said the Medical Man.
still travelling with prodigious velocity--the blinking succession
stone arbour, engaged in conversation, chiefly of smiles. The
stone, loomed indistinctly beyond the rhododendrons through the hazy
stood in the dark, a hand touched mine, lank fingers came feeling
stood up and found my foot with the loose heel swollen at the ankle
stopped abruptly, with my hands clutching my hair. Above me towered
stopped. Dozens of them seemed to be crawling here and there, in the
'Story be damned!' said the Time Traveller. 'I want something to
'Story!' cried the Editor.
strange developments of humanity, what wonderful advances upon our
strange incredible company of blind things groping to and fro, and
strangely disconcerted. "Good-bye, little Weena," I said, kissing
strange, perhaps, that I had not noticed this before. But everything
strange sense of freedom and adventure I pushed on up to the crest.
strangest fashion.
streaming masses of black smoke and the whitening and blackening
strides down the slope. Once I fell headlong and cut my face; I lost
strike off to the left. But at last I emerged upon a small open
struggle against this faintness. Several times my head swam, and I
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
substance in the space which I, or the machine, occupied. So long
subterranean. There were three circumstances in particular which
subtly conceived and however adroitly done, could have been played
subways, there are underground workrooms and restaurants, and they
succulent giving of flesh and bone under my blows, and for a moment
such a life, what we should call the weak are as well equipped as
such a line, and that line, therefore, we must conclude was along
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
such a very difficult problem to guess what the coming Dark Nights
such details are easy enough to obtain when the whole world is
such things must be made. And the little people displayed no vestige
suddenly found myself near the model of a tin-mine, and then by the
'Suddenly I noticed that the circular westward outline of the sun
suddenly out of the quiet darkness with inarticulate noises and the
suddenly the humour of the situation came into my mind: the thought
'Suddenly Weena came very close to my side. So suddenly that she
sudden shiver, came the clear knowledge of what the meat I had seen
sufferance: since the Morlocks, subterranean for innumerable
suffered this fate. Whatever the reason, the fact remains that the
sufficient, I judged, for any Morlock skull I might encounter. And I
suggested. For my own part, I was particularly preoccupied with the
suggestion of an extensive system of subterranean ventilation, whose
suggestions of old Phoenician decorations as I passed through, and
sun. At once a quaintly pretty little figure in chequered purple and
sun had long since disappeared; for the sun had ceased to set--it
sunlight. I fell upon my face. Even the soil smelt sweet and clean.
sunlight were very pleasant. I was very tired and sleepy, and soon
sunrise.
sunset. Well, that night the expectation took the colour of my
sun was very much hotter than we know it.
suppose I covered the whole distance from the hill crest to the
Suppressing a strong inclination to laugh, I stepped through the
surface of the land. About London, for instance, perhaps half the
surface, which has only two dimensions, we can represent a figure of
surveyed the hall at my leisure.
survival of an old habit of service. They did it as a standing horse
swaying, its long antennae, like carters' whips, waving and feeling,
sweeping round as fast as the seconds hand of a watch--into
swept back into the past, and fell among the blood-drinking, hairy
swimmer. It will give you an idea, therefore, of the strange
sword. I could not carry both, however, and my bar of iron promised
table was a small shaded lamp, the bright light of which fell upon
taking Weena like a child upon my shoulder, I went up the hills
tale of London which a negro, fresh from Central Africa, would take
tall pinnacles of the Palace of Green Porcelain and the polished
tampering with it in that way when they were removed. It had moved,
telling anecdotes of Hettie Potter. The Time Traveller devoted his
telling you the story.
temerity of my voyage came suddenly upon me. What might appear when
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
than it is now.
Thanks. And the salt.'
than our cannibal ancestors of three or four thousand years ago.
_that_?'
that
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
'That climb seemed interminable to me. With the last twenty or
that commerce which constitutes the body of our world, was gone. It
that covered every projecting point on their south-eastern face. It
'That day, too, I made a friend--of a sort. It happened that, as I
that experience I did not dare to rest again. Though my arms and
that had stopped me on the previous journey. My plan was to go as
that hazy curtain was altogether withdrawn? What might not have
that I at once accepted it, and went on to assume the _how_ of this
that I could barely save that engagement. I got up and went down the
that I had built the Time Machine in vain.
'That is all right,' said the Psychologist.
'That is the germ of my great discovery. But you are wrong to say
that it seemed to hover. The pedestal, it appeared to me, was of
that I was doing as foolish a thing as it was possible for me to do
that my store of matches had run low. It had never occurred to me
that Nature had endowed me with--hands, feet, and teeth; these, and
that, possibly, there might be cemeteries (or crematoria) somewhere
'That,' said a very young man, making spasmodic efforts to relight
that sea anemones were feeling over my face with their soft palps.
'That shall travel indifferently in any direction of Space and Time,
that was between the two species, and for the first time, with a
that was pain.
that we cannot move about in Time. For instance, if I am recalling
That would account for the abandoned ruins. Very simple was my
the air. My fire would not need replenishing for an hour or so. I
the air was.
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
'The arch of the doorway was richly carved, but naturally I did
The bare thought of it was an actual physical sensation. I could
the bars bent suddenly under my weight, and almost swung me off into
the beautiful race that I already knew.
the beauty of the Over-world people covered. Very pleasant was their
the best thing we could do would be to pass the night in the open,
'The big doorway opened into a proportionately great hall hung with
the blackness beneath. For a moment I hung by one hand, and after
the black pillars of the nearer trees, the flames of the burning
the bleached look common in most animals that live largely in the
the bottom of my heart I pitied this last feeble rill from the great
The brown and charred rags that hung from the sides of it, I
'The building had a huge entry, and was altogether of colossal
the buildings and trees seemed easily practicable to such dexterous
'The calm of evening was upon the world as I emerged from the great
'The camphor flickered and went out. I lit a match, and as I did so,
the cause of human intelligence and vigour? Hardship and freedom:
the change. What, unless biological science is a mass of errors, is
the children seemed to my eyes to be but the miniatures of their
the clear air, knowing the hawk wings above and will swoop. My fear
The clear blue of the distance faded, and one star after another
the clock. A moment before, as it seemed, it had stood at a minute
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
the corner of the marble table near me was fractured. Nevertheless,
the curious possibilities of anachronism and of utter confusion it
the dance of the shadows, how we all followed him, puzzled but
the dark. I wondered vaguely what foul villainy it might be that
'The darkness grew apace; a cold wind began to blow in freshening
the daylight without, was watching me out of the darkness.
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
the dim shadows of houses, the evidences of decadent humanity.
the distant hills vanished into blackness. The breeze rose to a
the door into the corridor. We followed him. There in the flickering
the earth.
the earth, a twilight only broken now and then when a comet glared
the earth. The red tongues that went licking up my heap of wood were
the ease and the sunshine. And now that brother was coming back
The Editor stood up with a sigh. 'What a pity it is you're not
The Editor wanted that explained to him, and the Psychologist
the Eloi were masters, could they not restore the machine to me? And
the end, the balance being permanent, the survivors would become as
'The enemy I dreaded may surprise you. It was the darkness of the
'The experiment!' cried Filby, who was getting brain-weary.
The fact is that, insensibly, the absolute strangeness of everything,
the faint rustle of the breeze above, and my own breathing and the
the figure of the White Sphinx upon the pedestal of bronze, growing
the fire. Then he turned, lighting his pipe, to look at the
The first to recover completely from this surprise was the Medical
the forest, I think, this last scramble.
the former three dimensions and the latter, because it happens that
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
the future is still black and blank--is a vast ignorance, lit at a
the Future? The Journalist too, would not believe at any price, and
the gallery ran down at last into a thick darkness. I hesitated, and
the general effect was extremely rich and picturesque. There were,
The German scholars have improved Greek so much.'
the gravities of terrestrial life. I thought of their unfathomable
'The great triumph of Humanity I had dreamed of took a different
the ground with my hands, and got up and sat down again, and
'The gynaeceum's odd,' he said. The Psychologist leant forward to
the heat of its fermentation, but this rarely results in flame. In
the hill among them and avoided them, looking for some trace of
the hill crest towards Wimbledon, Weena grew tired and wanted to
the horizon. I was determined to reach the White Sphinx early the
the horizon, lay the huge hull of the sun, red and motionless. The
The idea was received with melodious applause; and presently they
the imminent dangers of the young. _Now_, where are these imminent
the impression it creates will of course be only one-fiftieth or
the increasing refinement of their education, and the widening gulf
their burrows as a declaration of war. And why had they taken my
their dim way to grasp its purpose.
their end was the same.
Their hair, which was uniformly curly, came to a sharp end at the
their hands upon me. Flinging off their clinging fingers I hastily
their insidious approach. The forest, I calculated, was rather
their intellectual degradation, the Eloi had kept too much of the
their lack of interest. They would come to me with eager cries of
their language was excessively simple--almost exclusively composed
their physical and intellectual inadequacy. That is what dismayed
their presence. I really believe that had they not been so, I should
their reputations for judgment with him was like furnishing a
their way, as the Upper-world people were to theirs. As it seemed to
the ivory bars is cracked, and a brass rail bent; but the rest of
the laboratory had been destroyed and I had come into the open air.
The laboratory, however, was empty. I stared for a minute at the
the laboratory slam, seated myself in a chair, and took up a daily
the Labourer, was the key to the whole position. No doubt it will
the labours of his fellow-man, had taken Necessity as his watchword
_The Land of the Leal_ as cheerfully as I could. In part it was a
'The landscape was misty and vague. I was still on the hill-side
the last night of all, she slept with her head pillowed on my arm.
the last she had concluded that they were an eccentric kind of vase
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
the leaves, and incapable of stinging. It was evidently the derelict
the lever, and incontinently the thing went reeling over, and I was
the levers and depart then like a ghost. But I had overlooked one
the life of me I could not imagine. Those waterless wells, too,
the light of the rising moon. It seemed to smile in mockery of my
the limbs soon brought her round, and I had the satisfaction of
the loose part of his robe round the neck, and began dragging him
the love of battle, for instance, are no great help--may even be
the machine could not have moved in time. The attachment of the
the machine. The blinking succession of the days and nights was
'The machine was standing on a sloping beach. The sea stretched away
the many palps of its complicated mouth flickering and feeling as it
'The material of the Palace proved on examination to be indeed
them. But here and there were warped boards and cracked metallic
them closely at this time. The Time Machine was left deserted on the
the mechanism in some shelter for me, had I not felt assured of
The Medical Man got up out of his chair and peered into the thing.
The Medical Man rose, came to the lamp, and examined the flowers.
The Medical Man smoked a cigarette, and watched the Time Traveller
the model. There were also perhaps a dozen candles about, two in
them. On that theory they would have grown innumerable some Eight
the moon, but there is much to incline me to believe that what I
'The moon was setting, and the dying moonlight and the first pallor
the Morlocks--a something inhuman and malign. Instinctively I
the Morlocks, but it was yet early in the night, and the darker hours
the Morlocks did under the new moon. I felt pretty sure now that
the Morlocks had even partially taken it to pieces while trying in
the motion. This saddle represents the seat of a time traveller.
them, seated as near to me as they could come, were watching me with
them upon me until I was almost smothered with blossom. You who
them was seized with cramp and began drifting downstream. The main
them with the levers, and began to scramble into the saddle of the
'Then, again, about the Time Machine: something, I knew not what,
then, as I looked round me, I saw that the dust was less abundant
'Then came troublesome doubts. Why had the Morlocks taken my Time
The Nemesis of the delicate ones was creeping on apace. Ages ago,
'The next night I did not sleep well. Probably my health was a
the next, though its odd potentialities ran, no doubt, in most of
The next Thursday I went again to Richmond--I suppose I was one of
'Then, going up a broad staircase, we came to what may once have
Then he drew up a chair, and sat down. The only other object on the
Then hesitating for a moment how to express time, I pointed to the
the night before her rescue that I was awakened about dawn. I had
Then I had to look down at the unstable hooks to which I clung.
'Then I heard voices approaching me. Coming through the bushes by
Then I remember Weena kissing my hands and ears, and the voices of
Then I shall go to bed. But no interruptions! Is it agreed?'
'Then I stopped the machine, and saw about me again the old familiar
'Then I tried to preserve myself from the horror that was coming
Then I wanted to arrange some contrivance to break open the doors of
the nose of a steatite monster from South America that particularly
Then the match scratched and fizzed. I held it flaring, and saw the
Then the old walls of the laboratory came round me. Very gently,
'Then there is the future,' said the Very Young Man. 'Just think!
then, when it was not too late, I thought of a danger I had hitherto
the object of my investigations into the geometry of Four
'The old instinctive dread of wild beasts came upon me. I clenched
the parent body. As these catastrophes occur, the sun will blaze
'The peculiar risk lay in the possibility of my finding some
the place on a moist afternoon when distances are deceptively
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
the proper order. I remember a long gallery of rusting stands of
The Psychologist looked at us. 'I wonder what he's got?'
The Psychologist recovered from his stupor, and suddenly looked
the Psychologist's account of our previous meeting. The new guests
The Psychologist was the only person besides the Doctor and myself
there--a floury thing in a three-sided husk--was especially good,
there, and the whole thing have been a dream.
there came now and then a stir of living things. Above me shone the
there came the sharp vertical line of some cupola or obelisk. There
'There I found a seat of some yellow metal that I did not recognize,
'There I found a second great hall covered with cushions, upon
there I found traces of the little people in the shape of rare
there in excellent plain English, and interpolated therewith, others
there in the dimness I almost walked into a little river. This I
'There I object,' said Filby. 'Of course a solid body may exist. All
There is, however, a tendency to draw an unreal distinction between
there is one!'
there may once have been had rotted into dust. One corner I saw was
There's some magazines here. If you'll stop to lunch I'll prove you
The rest of the dinner was uncomfortable. For my own part, sudden
There was a minute's pause perhaps. The Psychologist seemed about to
'There was the sound of a clap of thunder in my ears. I may have
'There were others coming, and presently a little group of perhaps
There were other signs of removal about, with queer narrow
the room was brilliantly illuminated. I sat in a low arm-chair
the round openings in the sides of the tables. I was not loath to
The ruddy sunset set me thinking of the sunset of mankind. For the
the same to hers. Then I tried talk, and found that her name was
these creatures fools? You may hardly understand how it took me.
these creatures were called--I could imagine that the modification
these emerged in a pathway leading straight to the little lawn upon
these inhuman sons of men----! I tried to look at the thing in a
these new sensations. But presently a fresh series of impressions
these pretty little people that inspired confidence--a graceful
These, too, changed and passed, and others came. Presently, when the
these tunnellings were the habitat of the new race. The presence of
the sickly jarring and swaying of the machine, above all, the
the side of these wells, and peering down into the shafted darkness,
the sides of the well, and these being adapted to the needs of
the silver birch against it. There was the tangle of rhododendron
the sky and, circling, disappear over some low hillocks beyond. The
the sky took on a wonderful deepness of blue, a splendid luminous
The sky was no longer blue. North-eastward it was inky black,
the sphinx, upon the bronze pedestal, white, shining, leprous, in
The stained-glass windows, which displayed only a geometrical
the starting lever in one hand and the stopping one in the other,
the stir and murmur of a great company!
the stir that makes the background of our lives--all that was over.
'The strange exultation that so often seems to accompany hard
the strength of the lever pretty correctly, for it snapped after a
the strong, are indeed no longer weak. Better equipped indeed they
the sun had come to obscure nearly a tenth part of the darkling
the sun in a thunderstorm! It let loose the judgment I had suspended
the sun will go on cooling steadily in the future. But people,
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
the thick dust, I found the old familiar glass cases of our own
The thing the Time Traveller held in his hand was a glittering
The tiled floor was thick with dust, and a remarkable array of
the Time-Dimension.'
The Time Machine, by H. G. Wells [1898]
The Time Machine had gone. Save for a subsiding stir of dust, the
the Time Traveller and the fireplace. Filby sat behind him, looking
The Time Traveller came to the place reserved for him without a
The Time Traveller (for so it will be convenient to speak of him)
The Time Traveller hesitated. Then suddenly: 'Certainly not.'
The Time Traveller looked at us, and then at the mechanism. 'Well?'
The Time Traveller paused, put his hand into his pocket, and
The Time Traveller pushed his glass towards the Silent Man and rang
The Time Traveller put his hand to his head. He spoke like one who
The Time Traveller put the lamp down on the bench, and ran his hand
The Time Traveller smiled. 'Are you sure we can move freely in
The Time Traveller smiled round at us. Then, still smiling faintly,
the Time Traveller's most constant guests--and, arriving late, found
The Time Traveller turned to us. 'Where are the matches?' he said.
the trailing garments of a ghost. Above me, in the intense blue
The turf gave better counsel. I found a groove ripped in it, about
the turns of his story! Most of us hearers were in shadow, for the
the unknown past into the unknown future. I thought of the great
'The unpleasant sensations of the start were less poignant now. They
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
the Very Young Man thought.
the view keenly. But I saw no vestige of my white figures. They were
the wall, and now I saw for the first time a number of metal foot
the weaker go to the wall; conditions that put a premium upon the
the wear of time for immemorial years was a most strange, as for
the well, and again I failed. So presently I left them, meaning to
the White Sphinx were the heads and shoulders of men running. One of
the whole secret of these delicious people. Possibly the checks they
The whole surface of the earth seemed changed--melting and flowing
the whole world has gone wrong. We are always getting away from the
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
the world. The red eastern sky, the northward blackness, the salt
the world to keep my hands off their pretty laughing faces. It was
they mean it. It is only another way of looking at Time. _There is
'They seemed distressed to find me, my arm against the overturned
They were becoming reacquainted with Fear. And suddenly there came
they were before long, for I never met people more indolent or more
they would starve or be suffocated for arrears. Such of them as were
thing--against the red water of the sea. It was a round thing, the
thing at Tubingen, and laid considerable stress on the blowing out
thing in nature as the night. And then I thought once more of the
thing like a huge white butterfly go slanting and fluttering up into
thing might be. As I stood staring, the door into the garden opened,
thing out of futurity. He came straight up to me and laughed into my
Things of which I went in terror. Then I thought of the Great Fear
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
things. The palpitating greyness grew darker; then--though I was
thing. They were both the new kind of journalist--very joyous,
thinking and doing came home to me very vividly in the darkness. I
think rapidly what to do. I determined to build a fire and encamp
think, to want to go killing one's own descendants! But it was
think. You can explain that. It's presentation below the threshold,
thirty feet of it a deadly nausea came upon me. I had the greatest
'This adjustment, I say, must have been done, and done well; done
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
this artificial Underworld that such work as was necessary to the
this decadence, too, the art of fire-making had been forgotten on
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
***** This file should be named 35.txt or 35.zip *****
this fireside, of some of you, and with such thoughts came a longing
'This happened in the morning. In the afternoon I met my little
'This little affair,' said the Time Traveller, resting his elbows
this time travelling? A man couldn't cover himself with dust by
this time travelling up to the hilt, specimen and all. If you'll
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
those bronze doors. Up to this, I had refrained from forcing them,
those flickering pillars. I felt I lacked a clue. I felt--how shall
those in a signal-box. Clambering upon the stand, and grasping this
those large eyes, with that capacity for reflecting light, are
though on the whole they were the best preserved of all I saw, I had
though some people who talk about the Fourth Dimension do not know
thought it was a jest and laughed at me. I had the hardest task in
thousands of generations ago, man had thrust his brother man out of
thousands one seemed motionless and the daily one was no longer a
thousand years or more, drawn on by the mystery of the earth's fate,
threatening grimaces at her, and she simply laughed at them. But she
three?--and have even tried to construct a Four-Dimension geometry.
three planes, each at right angles to the others. But some
three which we call the three planes of Space, and a fourth, Time.
throat of one, and, instead of fluttering slowly down, it was at
throb of the blood-vessels in my ears. Then I seemed to know of a
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
through a haze of smoke the Palace of Green Porcelain, and from that
through his eyelashes. The Silent Man seemed even more clumsy than
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
'Through that long night I held my mind off the Morlocks as well as
through the interstices of intervening substances! But to come to
through the passage here, limping, because my heel was still
through the rare tatters of that red canopy, remote as though they
through the veil of my confusion the earth seemed very fair. And so
thudding sound of a machine below grew louder and more oppressive.
thunderstorm. The grey downpour was swept aside and vanished like
time?'
time. But they must have been air-tight to judge from the fair
time for reflection. My iron bar still gripped, I followed in the
time I clung to the machine as it swayed and vibrated, quite
time in this real future. In some of these visions of Utopias and
time! I say, for my own part. He, I know--for the question had been
Time is only a kind of Space. Here is a popular scientific diagram,
Time is really only a fourth dimension of Space, why is it, and why
Time Machine?
Time Machine and put out my hand and touched the lever. At that the
Time Machine. Towards that, as yet, I had only my iron mace. But
times--but I can't stand another that won't fit. It's madness. And
times had that silent revolution occurred during all the years that
times. Then, as my vigil wore on, came a faintness in the eastward
time. That's plain enough.' He passed his hand through the space in
time the flames died down somewhat, and I feared the foul creatures
Time Traveller asked us what we thought of it all.
Time Traveller's face.
time, with the certainty that sometimes comes with excessive dread,
time. You will notice that it looks singularly askew, and that there
to all the ages.
to a mere beautiful futility. They still possessed the earth on
to and fro, screaming and crying upon God and Fate. I have a memory
to appreciate.
'To discover a society,' said I, 'erected on a strictly communistic
to frame a question about it in their tongue, they were still more
to hear so much. At the sight of him I suddenly regained confidence.
to her was the one thing dreadful. It was a singularly passionate
'To judge from the size of the place, this Palace of Green Porcelain
told you was true. I'm sorry to have brought you out here in the
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
tolerably sure of the avoidance. I was careful, however, to show no
to meet a huge variety of needs and dangers.
to me to twinkle very little.
to my marrow, and the pain I felt in breathing, overcame me. I
to myself: "They have moved it a little, pushed it under the bushes
to-night in this old familiar room looking into your friendly faces
to nod and open my eyes. But all was dark, and the Morlocks had
too easily. The serious people who took him seriously never felt
too harsh and deep for them. So I shook my head, and, pointing to my
too, is shy and slow in our clumsy hands. Some day all this will
took my fancy.
too much keenness the inadequacy of pen and ink--and, above all, my
too, were creeping over my coat and back, touching even my neck.
topic was unendurable. And when I pressed her, perhaps a little
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
to push on and explore. But the day was growing late, and I had come
to put the thought of my Time Machine and the mystery of the bronze
to remark these apertures; for when I pointed to this one, and tried
torment had gone. Why should I trouble myself? These Eloi were mere
to stick in my pockets. My pockets had always puzzled Weena, but at
to stretch through centuries. At last a steady twilight brooded over
to strike another match and escape under the protection of its
to survival, are a constant source of failure. Physical courage and
to the closing, in their interest, of considerable portions of the
to the neighbourhood of the White Sphinx almost the feeling of
to the one I had seen above ground in the ruin, hastily retreating
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
to the south-west, to rise into a sharp bright horizon against the
to the starting-point, the night and day flapped slower and slower.
to this at last. Once, life and property must have reached almost
'To travel through Time!' exclaimed the Very Young Man.
touched my hand. Then I felt other soft little tentacles upon my
touch of the contrivance, the thing I had expected happened. The
touch. Probably my shrinking was largely due to the sympathetic
to use a grossly improper gesture to a delicate-minded woman--it is
towards comfort and ease, a balanced society with security and
towards it. Can you imagine what I felt as this conviction came
towards me. In another moment the pale stars alone were visible. All
towards me; the sightless eyes seemed to watch me; there was the
towards refined habits on the part of the rich--will make that
towards the solution of the economic problem that had puzzled me.
towards the south-west. The distance, I had reckoned, was seven or
towards the sphinx. Then I saw the horror and repugnance of his
towards the subjugation of Nature. In the end, wisely and carefully
towards the top of the hill, and as my walking powers were evidently
to watch the place. But I was too restless to watch long; I am too
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
trailed down from it; it seemed black against the weltering
train of thinking. As for the rest of the contents of that gallery,
transparent that the bench behind with its sheets of drawings was
travelled into the future it would still be here all this time,
Traveller. And therewith, taking the lamp in his hand, he led the
Traveller had more than a touch of whim among his elements, and we
Traveller limping painfully upstairs. I don't think any one else had
Traveller's shoulder.
travelling. They are excessively unpleasant. There is a feeling
travelling through time fifty times or a hundred times faster than
travel-soiled. The freshness of the morning made me desire an equal
traverse the place, but to me she seemed to shoot across the room
tree-boles to strike against.
tree stumps, and the diminishing numbers of these dim creatures,
trick of the model. That I remember discussing with the Medical Man,
tried to follow me everywhere, and on my next journey out and about
tried what I could to revive her, but she lay like one dead. I could
triumphed, and for five of the nights of our acquaintance, including
trouble as comfort from her devotion. Nevertheless she was, somehow,
true import it was difficult to imagine. I was at first inclined to
truth as a mere stroke of art to enhance its interest. And taking
turf among the rhododendrons.
turned towards the door.
turned to what old habit had hitherto forbidden. So I say I saw it
turning such schemes over in my mind I pursued our way towards the
twenty-three, and so on. All these are evidently sections, as it
twilight.
twinkled, and his usually pale face was flushed and animated. The
two legs on the hearthrug. On this table he placed the mechanism.
two white forms that had been approaching Weena dashed hastily away.
unaccountable thing. He took one of the small octagonal tables that
unavoidable risk--one of the risks a man has got to take! Now the
unbroken case. And at last, in one of the really air-tight cases,
unbroken darkness had had a distressing effect upon my eyes. The air
uncertain, early-morning feeling you may have known. I doubted
uncomfortable, savage survivals, discords in a refined and pleasant
undecorated, were fairly complex specimens of metalwork. Somehow
underground mysteries. Yet I could not face the mystery. If only I
underground ventilation. I began to suspect their true import. And
under my eyes. The little hands upon the dials that registered my
understood the smell of burning wood, the slumbrous murmur that was
under the circumstances, in trying to revive the sensation of fear.
'Under the new conditions of perfect comfort and security, that
under the starlight of the sable sky and I could see an undulating
under the table. At that the Time Traveller laughed cheerfully.
Under-world being in contact with machinery, which, however perfect,
unfamiliar with such speculations as those of the younger Darwin,
unfrozen.
unheeding how I went, and when I brought myself to look at the dials
unhinged, helped himself to a cigar and tried to light it uncut.)
united humanity over Nature had followed another. Things that are
universal decay this volatile substance had chanced to survive,
unknown character. I thought, rather foolishly, that Weena might
Unknown. This possibility had occurred to me again and again while I
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
unlikelier substance, and that was camphor. I found it in a sealed
unmeaning shapes, the obscene figures lurking in the shadows, and
unpleasant. The sudden realization of my ignorance of their ways of
unseen, and which contributed to my comfort; but save for a general
until at last there was a pit like the "area" of a London house
until my growing knowledge would lead me back to them in a natural
until that moment that there was any need to economize them, and I
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
upon a turfy down, and looking north-eastward before I entered it, I
upon me, by regarding it as a rigorous punishment of human
upon--probably saw to the breeding of. And there was Weena dancing
'Upon that machine,' said the Time Traveller, holding the lamp
upon their clothes, their frail light limbs, and fragile features.
upon the little table. Then he turned over the hand holding his
upon them to notice the gradual diminution of the light, until
upon--there would still be all the roots to stumble over and the
Upon these my conductors seated themselves, signing for me to do
upon the shoal--there was no mistake now that it was a moving
upon the sight of the place after a long and tiring circuit; so I
upon the table and pressing his hands together above the apparatus,
upon this bank, but it became motionless as I looked at it, and I
upon us under these conditions.
upon which this house now stands, and the shoulder rose above me
Upper-world people came running in their amorous sport across the
up, shaking the human rats from me, and, holding the bar short,
up the new-found clue in what was manifestly the proper way. I felt
up the shaft again, and leave the Under-world alone. But even while
used all its abundant vitality to alter the conditions under which
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
useless. There is no intelligence where there is no change and no
usual, and drank champagne with regularity and determination out of
utter darkness beyond the range of my light. The view I had of it
V
vague sense of something familiar, but I could not tell what it was
valley, but the Thames had shifted perhaps a mile from its present
vanished, and was followed by the bright, brief green of spring.
velocity from the cradle to the grave. Just as we should travel _down_
ventilating shafts and wells along the hill slopes--everywhere, in
verdigris came off in powdery flakes. The delicate little people
very clear, except for a hazy cloud or so. No doubt I dozed at
very fast. The sensation reminded me of my only experience of
Very Young Man stood behind the Psychologist. We were all on the
VI
VII
VIII
violence comes but rarely and off-spring are secure, there is less
violently in and out among the moonlit bushes all round the sphinx,
visible when we came first into this room; and last Thursday when we
visibly distressed and turned away. But they were interested by my
vividly the flickering light, his queer, broad head in silhouette,
voice was harsh and ill-controlled. I put out my hand and touched
volunteered a wooden account of the 'ingenious paradox and trick' we
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
waded, and went up the opposite side of the valley, past a number
wait a lifetime. The Time Traveller vanished three years ago. And,
waiting at dinner--for a hot plate. At that the Editor turned to his
waiting five, ten, fifteen minutes for an explosion that never came.
wait until to-morrow. Wait for the common sense of the morning.'
wandered here and there, and again sat down. Then I would fall to
Wandsworth and Battersea must once have been. I thought then--though
wan sky. There were no breakers and no waves, for not a breath of
want you clearly to understand that this lever, being pressed over,
want your machine again you must leave that sphinx alone. If they
warm trickle down my cheek and chin. All the time I ran I was saying
war or solitary violence, no danger from wild beasts, no wasting
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
was absolutely afraid to go! As I hesitated, two of the beautiful
was all right. The Editor began a question. 'Tell you presently,'
was as much as one could see in the burning of a match.
was at ten o'clock to-day that the first of all Time Machines began
was blown out, and the little machine suddenly swung round, became
was built into the side of a hill.--ED.] The end I had come in at
was drowning before their eyes. When I realized this, I hurriedly
was expounding a recondite matter to us. His grey eyes shone and
was facing the door, and saw it first. 'Hallo!' I said. 'At last!'
was fainting. But a terrible dread of lying helpless in that remote
was flaxen hair on its head and down its back. But, as I say, it
was full of the throb and hum of machinery pumping air down the
was hotter, or the earth nearer the sun. It is usual to assume that
was ill curbed and still eager to take advantage of my perplexity.
was making the machine; but then I had cheerfully accepted it as an
was natural on that golden evening that I should jump at the idea of
was new to me; it was even more splendid than our own green Sirius.
was no outlet. No doubt the exquisite beauty of the buildings I saw
was quite above ground, and was lit by rare slit-like windows. As
was something in this way. (Afterwards I found I had got only a
was so strange. Now, I saw the fact plainly enough. In costume, and
was surprised to see a large estuary, or even creek, where I judged
was the outcome of the last surgings of the now purposeless energy
was the Psychologist himself who sent forth the model Time Machine
was the same beautiful scene, the same abundant foliage, the same
was the same rich green that one sees on forest moss or on the
was trembling with the prolonged terror of a fall. Besides this, the
was trying to keep hold of an idea that eluded him. 'They were put
was very stuffy and oppressive, and the faint halitus of freshly
was violently tugged backward. I lit my last match ... and it
was watching some of the little people bathing in a shallow, one of
Watchett had walked across the room, travelling, as it seemed to me,
watching with a strange fascination the sun grow larger and duller
way down the long, draughty corridor to his laboratory. I remember
way, leave me again to my own devices.
way--marking the points with a lean forefinger--as we sat and lazily
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
way. Yet a certain feeling, you may understand, tethered me in a
we are, if it gets through a minute while we get through a second,
we'd better have dinner?'
'We emerged from the palace while the sun was still in part above
Weena, but she was gone. The hissing and crackling behind me, the
Weena. But Weena was gone.
Weena, deserted in the central aisle, began to whimper. I had judged
'Weena had been hugely delighted when I began to carry her, but
'Weena, I was glad to find, was fast asleep. I carefully wrapped her
Weena's increasing apprehensions drew my attention. Then I saw that
Weena, which, though I don't know what it meant, somehow seemed
we had all imitated the action of the Medical Man, he said: 'Now I
'Well----'
well adapted to the conditions of underground life, and as happy in
well appalled me. I don't know if you will understand my feeling,
well as I was able, to such of the little people as came by. They
'Well?' he said, with a reminiscence of the Psychologist. Then,
'Well, I do not mind telling you I have been at work upon this
well-known daily paper; and thereupon the Doctor rang the bell.
'Well, mace in one hand and Weena in the other, I went out of that
well-mouth somehow, and staggered out of the ruin into the blinding
'Well, one very hot morning--my fourth, I think--as I was seeking
wells, to the ventilating towers, to the mystery of the ghosts; to
We looked at each other. Then ideas began to come. 'Has Mr. ----
we move in Time as we move about in the other dimensions of Space?'
went out through the portal into the sunlit world again as soon as
went too fast for me to see distinctly. I cannot even say whether it
went with them the memory of my confident anticipations of a
were all running to and fro for flowers, and laughingly flinging
were by the current of my meditations, but coming in almost like a
were descending upon me. In a moment my hand was on the lever, and
were frankly incredulous. The Editor raised objections. 'What _was_
were here; and the Thursday before that; and so forth!'
were innumerable tables made of slabs of polished stone, raised
were kept going.
were no hedges, no signs of proprietary rights, no evidences of
were scattered about the room, and set it in front of the fire, with
were sometimes frantic, and I think, altogether, I had as much
were there, they would no doubt have to pay rent, and not a little
were, Three-Dimensional representations of his Four-Dimensioned
were wriggling on their stalks, its mouth was all alive with
We sat and stared at the vacant table for a minute or so. Then the
we shall readjust the balance of animal and vegetable life to suit
We stared at each other. 'Look here,' said the Medical Man, 'are you
We stared at him in silence, expecting him to speak.
whatever lay in my way; meant bringing my atoms into such intimate
what he knew, how much could he make his untravelled friend either
What if in this interval the race had lost its manliness and had
what I had inflicted upon her when I left her. Nor until it was too
'What is more, I have a big machine nearly finished in there'--he
what it might hide. Under that dense tangle of branches one would
what, I wondered, was this Lemur doing in my scheme of a perfectly
'What reason?' said the Time Traveller.
'What's the game?' said the Journalist. 'Has he been doing the
what was clearly the lower part of a huge skeleton. I recognized
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
when I left her was very great, her expostulations at the parting
'When I reached the lawn my worst fears were realized. Not a trace
when she saw me lean over the mouth and look downward, she seemed
when the appearances of these unpleasant creatures from below, these
when the door from the corridor opened slowly and without noise. I
when the putting together was nearly done, I found that one of the
when things are just creeping out of darkness, when everything is
where did the dream come from? ... I must look at that machine. If
'Where did you really get them?' said the Medical Man.
"Where is my Time Machine?" I began, bawling like an angry child,
where, on arrival, I had struggled with the overturned machine.
'Where's----?' said I, naming our host.
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
where we were. I put Weena, still motionless, down upon a turfy
wherewith to break our fast. We soon met others of the dainty ones,
which at present retards the splitting of our species along lines
which had seemed to watch me all the while with a smile at my
which I stood with my machine. He was a slight creature--perhaps
which lasted a week, and ended--as I will tell you!
which, perhaps, a score or so of the little people were sleeping. I
which the conquest of animated nature had been attained. Then we
which the machine had been. 'You see?' he said, laughing.
which the river lay like a band of burnished steel. I have already
which--were on his feet; his legs were bare to the knees, and his
'While I was musing upon these things, my attention was attracted by
while little Weena's head showed as a round black projection. The
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
'While we hesitated, among the black bushes behind us, and dim
whirled round me as I opened the door, and from within came the
whisper. Beyond these lifeless sounds the world was silent. Silent?
white. A bitter cold assailed me. Rare white flakes ever and again
white backs of the Morlocks in flight amid the trees. I hastily took
white followed my gesture, and then astonished me by imitating the
whitened Lemurs, this new vermin that had replaced the old, might be
white ran past me. I turned with my heart in my mouth, and saw a
White Sphinx, was a meek surrender. I threw my iron bar away, almost
white stars. Overhead it was a deep Indian red and starless, and
who had attended the previous dinner. The other men were Blank, the
whom fire was a novelty. Now, as I say, I had four left, and while I
whom I met on Friday at the Linnaean. He said he had seen a similar
who repeats mystic words. 'Yes, I think I see it now,' he said after
whose end and side windows were blocked by fallen masses of stone.
'Why not?' said the Time Traveller.
'Why?' said the Time Traveller.
why were they so terribly afraid of the dark? I proceeded, as I have
widening gulf--which is due to the length and expense of the higher
widespread fire. Decaying vegetation may occasionally smoulder with
wild, among the variegated shrubs, but, as I say, I did not examine
will be renamed.
wind, and the lamp flame jumped. One of the candles on the mantel
wind. Its instability startled me extremely, and I had a queer
wind was stirring. Only a slight oily swell rose and fell like a
winked at me solemnly.
with a lighted match. But in all of them I heard a certain sound:
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
With a sudden fright I stooped to her. She seemed scarcely to
with bright red, rather thin lips, and the little chins ran to a
with coloured glass and partially unglazed, admitted a tempered
with exactly the same result. Somehow, his manner made me feel
with extreme slowness at work again upon all its treasures. Here and
with gaps of wonderment; and then the Editor got fervent in his
with incredulous surprise, that the others were running, in an
'Within the big valves of the door--which were open and broken--we
within the palace. It was turfed, and had three fruit-trees. So we
'Within was a small apartment, and on a raised place in the corner
with it nervously upon the bars of the grate. There was a momentary
with its many legs moving slowly and uncertainly, its big claws
with my clenched fist until my knuckles were gashed and bleeding
with renewed energy; and it may be that some inner planet had
with that the Time Traveller began his story as I have set it forth.
with the others. The Journalist tried to relieve the tension by
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net
with time travelling. And this time I was not seated properly in the
woman, as I believe it was, as I was returning towards my centre
woman, the institution of the family, and the differentiation of
wonderful flowers countless years of culture had created. Then
wondering what large animal could have survived to furnish the red
wood. For a little way the glare of my fire lit the path. Looking
wood in front. And their backs seemed no longer white, but reddish.
Wood, I observed far off, in the direction of nineteenth-century
wood. Upon the shrubby hill of its edge Weena would have stopped,
word. He smiled quietly, in his old way. 'Where's my mutton?' he
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
worker live in such artificial conditions as practically to be cut
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
works.
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
workshop. Consider I have been speculating upon the destinies of our
workshop. There it is now, a little travel-worn, truly; and one of
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
world.
world. Learn its ways, watch it, be careful of too hasty guesses
world. She was fearless enough in the daylight, and she had the
worn out, but I shan't sleep till I've told this thing over to you.
would be my only hope, perhaps, but better than despair. And, after
would bring with him. But I am beginning now to fear that I must
would make the descent without further waste of time, and started
would presently be able to see me. I was thinking of beginning the
'Would you like to see the Time Machine itself?' asked the Time
wretchedness. I had nothing left but misery. Then I slept, and when
writhing from it, completely encircling the space with a fence of
writing had never entered her head. She always seemed to me, I
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
wrought, and protected by a little cupola from the rain. Sitting by
X
XI
XII
years old, another at fifteen, another at seventeen, another at
years to see you."
yellow metal from which I had viewed the world upon the evening of
'Yes,' said the Time Traveller, with his mouth full, nodding his
'Yes, so it seemed to me, and so I never talked of it until--'
'Yet every now and then one would come straight towards me, setting
yet fumbling awkward flight towards dark shadow, and that peculiar
Yet I could think of no other. Let me put my difficulties. The
Yet I was still such a blockhead that I missed the lesson of that
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
you can ask for it. To sit among all those unknown things before a
'You _can_ move about in all directions of Space, but you cannot
'You can show black is white by argument,' said Filby, 'but you will
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
'You don't believe it?'
you, half closed by a fallen pillar. A sudden thought came to me.
'You have told Blank, and Dash, and Chose about the machine?' he
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
you: I retreated again, and when my second match had ended, I struck
you know, diluted presentation.'
'You may imagine how all my calm vanished. The little brutes were
'You mean to say that that machine has travelled into the future?'
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
'You must follow me carefully. I shall have to controvert one or two
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
your equipment.
yourselves there is no trickery. I don't want to waste this model,
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
You see I had always anticipated that the people of the year Eight
you that when I set out, before my velocity became very high, Mrs.
'You've just come? It's rather odd. He's unavoidably detained. He
you went down the length, the ground came up against these windows,
